

Role of AyuSoft to Ameliorate Evidence Based Medicine in Ayurveda






Role of AyuSoft to Ameliorate
Evidence Based Medicine in Ayurveda

Dr.Yogesh Prabhune,
B.A.M.S.


Introduction 

Documentation of Ayurvedic
clinical data in standard format is necessary today. Such data can convince the
world about safety and efficacy of Ayurvedic therapies. Present Ayurveda
infrastructure in India includes more than 100 research and PG centers and half
million of Ayurvedic practitioners. If all these institutes or individuals
document clinical data in universal format then it will help us to form
evidence base for Ayurveda. 

AyuSoft is a
comprehensive, interactive software system to assist medical practitioners and
researchers in application of basic principles of Ayurveda, rational
propagation of Ayurveda at global level. AyuSoft applications will help in creating this
multi aspect, evidence base and integration of data from various centers and
school of thoughts in a universal format. 


AyuSoft Applications 

Patient
information management system: - It
will help physician to document all clinical data (classical &
contemporary) e.g. Lakshana, Hetu, Vyadhi, Dashavidha Parikshaa, Ashtavidha
Parikshaa, Chikitsaa, contemporary etiological factors, signs & symptoms,
investigations, diagnosis and treatment. 
Diagnostics
and Treatment: - Based on Hetu and
Lakshana it will provide support for probable diagnosis & treatment of the
classical diseases. 
Prakriti Analysis: - This application is helpful in deciding Dosha
Prakriti, Maanasa Prakriti and Dhaatu Saarataa of an individual.
Anveshaka:
- It is a data-mining tool with
more than 4 lac records from classical text using permutations &
combinations of more than 250 search criteria.
Case
Analysis: - This tool is useful
for extensive for clinical data analysis with more than 200 search criteria.
Multidimensional analysis of clinical data can generate many innovative
findings and its correlation, those could form basis of further biomedical
research.
Customized Master list: - It is useful to document cotemporary etiological
factors, signs & symptoms, diseases, diet & lifestyle, investigations,
formulations.
Encyclopedia: It consists of digitalized text, glossary, video clips of therapeutic
procedure, audio files of mantra, articles, images etc. 




User
can access all above applications through internet, intranet or desktop
solution. User can import & export data, which will be useful for
multi-centric trials. Data captured against a patient or a healthy individual
will be useful for extensive analysis resulting in creation of evidence based
Ayurveda.


Using
these applications, we can analyze clinical data as follows,

E.g.

Display :- Classical
diagnosis + Dosha Avasthaa + Dhaatu
Avasthaa of patients
Input: -
Contemporary diagnosis = AIDS

Display: - Hetu of
patients suffering from C.R.F.

Show me patients
& their classical Lakshana (Purvarupa Avasthaa) suffering from Rheumatoid
Arthritis

Display effect of
medicine Aarogyavardhini in patients of Hepatitis


Show me Dosha
Prakriti, Dhatu Sarataa of patients suffering from Pandu 
 
Show me Nadi characteristics of patients of Vataja
Hridroga 

Show me no. of
patient 
 Input: - Classical
diagnosis:-Amlapitta + contemporary Hetu :- Pizza

Show me number of
individuals having Kapha Prakriti in which characteristics = Mahalalaata is
present. 

Display visit wise
data and percentage of relief in patients of Lakshana Sandhi Shula treated with
Abhyanga of Visha Garbha Taila.

Conclusion

The
major achievement will be generation of evidence base through extensive and
authentic documentation using AyuSoft by Ayurvedic physician, educational
institutes, research institutes and hospitals all over the world. We can
integrate this data to form a central scientific evaluation based knowledge
repository. Based on this data we can provide scientific foundation for
Ayurveda, which is the need of the day.







Dr.Yogesh Prabhune,
Research fellow,
AyuSoft Team,
Center for Development of Advanced
Computing, Pune






