

AyuSoft: IT- Ayurveda Integration for Health Challenges





AyuSoft: IT- Ayurveda integration for health challenges 

Dr Richa Barve


Ayurveda and current health challenges

In spite of technological
advances, the present global health care systems are facing the many challenges
like increase non communicable and lifestyle diseases as diabetes, coronary
artery disease etc. India is
expected to be world capital of diabetes in 2025.
Some infectious diseases like malaria, tuberculosis are still a challenge due
to drug resistance etc. Emerging diseases like AIDS, hepatitis are posing new
challenges to health care system and health economics. 

Ayurveda (ancient and
holistic science of life) is becoming center of attraction as potential
solution for current challenges. This is evident in changing policies and
mindset of researchers, physicians and patients.
Ayurveda adopts holistic but customized approach for diagnosis and treatment.
This holistic nature includes physical, psychological, social and spiritual
aspects.


Strengths of Ayurveda

More than drugs, Ayurveda considers every aspect of
life. Prevention of diseases is prime objective of Ayurveda. Various concepts
of Ayurveda like Rasayana and Panchakarma are becoming center of attraction for
researchers. It is being considered as powerful search engine for focused and
safe drug discovery. Ayurveda
is a potential option for many health challenges. 

It is the need of present times to renovate the
practice and research of Ayurveda globally. For this it is very much necessary to make Ayurveda
easily accessible, affordable and practical. There is an urgent need of an
effective & uniform professional media of conversation for the faculty of
Ayurveda. 


AyuSoft: multiple solutions for diverse needs

AyuSoft is designed
considering heterogeneous needs. AyuSoft is a vision for development of
multiple tools for awareness, training, practice, research and propagation of
Ayurveda through IT based solutions.

The objectives of AyuSoft are

Authentic training of Ayurveda
Research in Ayurveda
Documentation and analysis of practice based
     data 
Propagation and awareness about Ayurveda


AyuSoft is a
comprehensive, interactive, intelligent system. It is based on the knowledge of
classical Ayurvedic texts. It facilitates application of ayurvedic principles
to overcome present challenges. The main aim of this project is to shorten the
gap between the not easily accessible knowledge of Ayurveda and the issues
faced by present global health care systems.


AyuSoft applications 
AyuSoft covers multiple
applications under one roof. This has been designed after a national level
survey and consultation with experts of various fields. 

Decision
     Support System for physician 

Ayurveda Person Information Management System - This application mainly deals with management of
personal information.
Disease Diagnostic and Treatment - This application provides a precise diagnosis
based on consideration of causative factors, present signs and symptoms,
clinical examination and history etc. Treatment is also suggested considering
the condition of the patient and associated signs and symptoms etc. 
Constitution and tissue quality assessment  this covers assessment of physical constitution,
psychological characteristics and tissue quality assessment.
Case analysis  Through this tool all the statistical data of related to the
particular physician or hospital can be generated.
Data Mining Tool  It facilitates complex query building to get the required results.

Encyclopedia - This is encyclopedia of Ayurveda. This
     comprises of the digitalized classical tests, articles of all subjects of
     Ayurveda by renowned physicians and mentors, photos of many herbs, images
     of diseases, audio files of mantras and video clippings of Panchakarmas.
Glossary - This is the glossary of Ayurvedic
     terminologies. 


All these applications are
interconnected to each other and they could be used in clinical practice,
classrooms, multi-centric clinical trials and other teaching or research
institutes. Pharmaceutical industries and R&D sector could be benefited
with IPR generation through huge database. 

Utility in awareness, training, practice and
research
Each AyuSoft application
can be useful for multiple users as:
Ayurveda Personal Information Management System 

All data of clinic will be helpful for
     research purposes.
Evidence based clinical data generation will
     be very much easy due to this application. 
Import / export of data for multi-centric
     trials could be easier. 
Networking of many physicians is a practical
     need for follow-up, referral and second opinion. This can be achieved by
     the use of this application as an effective communication technology. 
The students will be able to share the experiences
     of all the stalwarts. Due to this, this tool can be used in training of
     health management.


Disease Diagnostic and Treatment

Accuracy in clinical examination, better
     documentation, time saving clinical management
With the help authentic database of Ayurveda,
     new or emerging diseases like AIDS and cancer could be studied in
     ayurvedic terminology and could be treated accordingly
Information about contemporary signs,
     symptoms, diagnosis and treatment could be documented. By comparing and
     correlating all this data we can standardize treatment of emerging
     diseases. 
Treatment suggested in our system covers
     multilevel management by drugs, diet, behavioral modifications and other
     dos and donts related to lifestyle and also Yoga. 
The system also suggests treatment to avoid
     recurrence of the disease and also the rejuvenation therapy (Rasayana) for
     specific diseases. This Rasayana therapy is mainly helpful in prevention
     of diseases and in building immunomodulatory system.
Data generated through this system can be used
     for efficacy and safety of ayurvedic drugs.


Constitution Assessment

This application will be mainly helpful in
     preventive medicine. The system suggests the diet and lifestyle depending
     upon the result of constitution (Dosha Prakriti). This advice is mainly
     for preventing the person from any disease for which he is prone. 
Right from the childhood i.e. the child
     psychology factor to career then to finding spouse and up to the old age.
     In childhood child psychology can be understood if Psychological
     constitution (Maanasa Prakriti) of the child is known. One can easily
     choose the career by knowing ones psychological and physical capacities. 
Tissue quality (Dhaatusaarataa) assessment is
     mainly related with the better body tissue development. The rasayana
     therapy suggested on the basis of this assessment will be helpful to
     develop strong immunological system.


Encyclopedia

Ayurveda domain has remained a challenge due
     to its complexity and vast logic just mentioned in Samhitas. Information
     retrieval was an art and lot of experience, judgment and reciting was
     needed. Now computers are changing this scenario by development of easy
     accessible data from Samhitas. This quick references and easily available
     information not only saves time but also helps as a source of innovative
     ideas. The digitalized Samhitaa part is very much helpful in training and
     research.
Easy access to Samhitaa would facilitate
     training of student and physician. Instead of any school of thought
     teaching modules developed in suitable multimedia form would make many
     complex concepts and terminologies clear. That will result in better
     understanding and perfection of the physician. 
The video clippings of Panchakarmas are
     provided with narration and detailed textual information. This will be
     very much helpful in training and also for physicians.
The photos of drugs are going to be an
     authentic source to identify the specific herbs. This will be very much
     helpful for students, teachers and the pharmaceutical industries.


Data mining tool 

All the data is divided into various
     categories. The diagnosis part contains signs and symptoms, causative
     factors etc. The treatment part contains formulations, dietary recipes,
     lifestyle advice etc.
One can search the voluminous database to get
     the required results by building queries through thousands of criteria.
This can be used as a simulating tool and
     could be helpful for training, research and for physicians.
Formulations and diet database would be major attraction
     of pharmaceutical industry for new formulation design. 


Glossary


Some ayurvedic terminological words are
     highlighted from etymology to clinical application. 
This application will be helpful for authentic
     training and research.
This application will be mainly helpful for
     propagation of Ayurveda.


Case Analysis 

Through this application we can generate all
     the statistical data needed for evidence based medicine.
     
This data will be helpful in practice.
The data generated by this tool will be helpful
     in proving the efficacy and non toxicity of certain ayurvedic drugs. 
This application will facilitate proper
     documentation of all the practical data.



Conclusion
AyuSoft provides various
solutions for layman, students, academicians, industry, practitioners and
researchers. This is a pioneering effort to facilitate application of Ayurvedic
concepts in modern era. Center of Development of Advanced Computing is working
on this project with the help of national level experts of Ayurveda,
information technology, medicine and basic sciences. This is the beginning of
Ayurveda and information technology integration for present challenges of
health care. 
Dr Richa Barve,
 Research Fellow,
Center of Development of Advanced Computing, Pune





International Diabetes Federation. Diabetes atlas 2000. Brussels: IDF, 2000



Burden of non-communicable diseases in South Asia. BMJ, 328, 807-810.


 World Health
Organization Traditional Medicine / CAM Strategy 2002-2005.


 Bhushan
Patwardhan et al, Ayurveda and natural products drug discovery, Current
Science, 86, 789  799, 2004


 Dhurandhar
Medha, Scientific Validation & Technical Evaluation of Ancient Medical
Systems workshop, Delhi, Feb 2006 


 Prabhune Yogesh,
Role of AyuSoft to Ameliorate Evidence Based Medicine in Ayurveda, National
Conference as Ayurveda Medicine as Evidence based Medicine, Hyderabad, Feb
2006. 




