

Scope & Research Potential of Prakriti






Scope & Research Potential of Prakriti


In the current era there
is more stress on preventive health care, not only of the physical being but
also of mental and social well being which has become the principal issue. Aayurveda is not only limited to body or
physical symptoms but also gives a comprehensive knowledge about spiritual,
mental and social health. Knowing your constitution thus allows you to
appreciate the workings of your mind and body better, there by allowing in managing
and systematizing over the traits through planned and adequate changes
incorporated into your lifestyle. Ayurveda
places importance on examining the Prakriti
or the natural state of an individual first, the disease state is examined
later. While the medicine experts analyze the disease, the Ayurvedic expert is interested in analyzing not only the disease
but the individual who is suffering from the disease.

The word Prakriti (constitution) not only gives
perception of the anatomical features but also provides an insight into the
deeper internal mechanism of an individual in terms of physiology, psychology
and quality and excellence of tissues. Prakriti
is the Ayurvedic profile or unique
psychosomatic temperament of an individual, encompassing his or her physical,
functional and behavioral characteristics. The varying proportions of Kapha, Pitta or Vaata Dosha determine the S`haareera Prakriti or the Dosha
Prakriti i.e., the body type which play a pivotal role. While all
individuals have mixed sum of the three Gun`a,
the predominant Gun`a determines an
individual's Maanasa Prakriti.
Evaluation of Maanasa Prakriti, i.e.,
psycho-spiritual profile is made by identifying the predominance of Psychic
factors i.e., Sattva, Raja and Tama. Dhaatu are termed as body constituents. These are seven in
number and their qualitative assessment can be performed by Saarataa Pareekshan`a. Saara is the essence of that particular constituent.
It reflects on various body parts in positive manner by which it is assessed. 

Like genetic coding, every
individual has a different combination and is therefore a distinct entity in
itself. That is the reason why two people react differently when exposed to a
similar situation. Thus according to Aayurveda
everyone is unique and each one of them has a distinct body constitution, which
is completely different from each other. Nature of emotions, thought, and
behavior patterns are unique to a person and are exhibited in a wide range of
social and personal environment. Interpretation of the same is necessary for
their behavior in cultural, social and home environment.


Need for understanding the concept of Prakriti:

By knowing our
constitution it is possible to locate our drawbacks and live at peace with
nature's wishes. There are some simple rules that help in the long run. The Dosha that predominate due to our
genetic inheritance dictates certain demands in terms of diet, life style and
environment. If we recognize this and try to follow it, we will be able to
achieve health. 
These are the following
important reasons why knowing your Prakriti
is the first step toward perfect health:-
By understanding Prakriti and their specific strengths
and weaknesses, you can begin to take preventive steps long before overt
illness appears. 
Prakriti
makes prevention more precise. If you try to prevent every disease without
knowing your particular predisposition, its like aiming in the dark.
Prakriti
makes treatment more accurate once a disease appears. 
Study of Prakriti offers reference points for
managing treatment decisions specific to each case. 
Study of Prakriti helps in understanding
variations in disease manifestation


Scope of Prakriti:

 



