

Research Methodology and Statistics Evident in Ayurveda Treatises






Research Methodology and
Statistics Evident in Ayurveda Treatises

Dr. Asmita Wele
M.D. (Ayurveda) Rasashastra

The gold standard to judge the
popularity and usefulness of any scientific branch is associated with the ongoing
research activities in that branch. This is because active research indicates
addition of new dimensions of applications, which in turn is a marker of
liveliness, vibrancy and futuristic approach of the branch. Research in health
sector is of the utmost importance pertaining to the immediate application of
the outcome to relieve human beings from pain and agony. Amongst all the
branches of science, medicine is the branch, which always receives high
priority due to its potential to address and solve current health problems and
issues. 


In the course of development, about the understanding of
human body and diseases over the last thousands of years, much water has flown
under the bridge but the concept of gold standard remain unchanged. This is
evident in a quote in Charaka Samhitaa that
says the science that is practiced by the famous, successful, eminent people,
praised by the intellectual class and is economically rewarding to the
practitioner is the best one. The quote is just an example pointing towards
the high status of Ayurveda in
ancient times, which is generally achieved only when research is an integral
part of the science. Available literary sources of Ayurveda not only highlight the research
attitude but also elaborate the methodology to the minutest details.


It is important to remember that research crux is palpable
in the text all the time, indirectly. The difference is today methodology of
research and statistics has become a consequential separate scientific branch
associated with each respective segment of knowledge. Ample literature about
how to conduct research with all aspect, is available in both text and
digital form. This type of generation of literature pertaining only to research
methods and statistics is not evident in Ayurvedic texts. Rather whatever is found scattered in Charaka Samhitaa  the oldest document is not found with the same
or more rigor in later Samhitaa_s like
Sus`hruta Samhitaa and Asht`aanga Hridaya. Therefore Charaka Samhitaa is the main reference
source for this article. 


Introduction
to concept:

The quest for knowledge generates out of inquisitiveness,
which ultimately leads to better understanding and explanation of various
phenomena. In all ancient sciences, the methods adapted to increase understanding
or knowledge base, are mainly experiential, observational and inferential. In
the process of development of knowledge the perspective regarding a scientific
concept or criteria of classification may change based on the logical
interpretations and experimental evidences. Ayurveda is no exception to the rule where the knowledge has developed
according to the above-mentioned system prevalent in those areas. Thus in order
to get an unbiased view of concepts of research in Ayurveda, it is a
must to understand its background circumstances and situations. 


Ayurveda was an oral tradition, which
proliferated to the written tradition later on and currently it is being
digitized to keep pace with time. Technologically the propagation of knowledge
has always been at par. Questions arise about the correct understanding and
interpretation of the contents of the revered science with changing
circumstances. The education methodology earlier was teacher centered rather
than learner centered. Methods of exchange of knowledge or testing,
presentation and spread of new knowledge were relevant to those days. At times
subjectivity used to take center stage on the practical level but the ultimate
objective has always been to search and arrive at truth.


If we compare the process of development of research
methods and associated activities of oriental sciences then we find a few
difference. Till the seventeenth century the perspective towards development of
knowledge was holistic the world
over. There was no need for separation or systemization of knowledge in a
different way than the existing. But then the industrial revolution changed the
traditional thought process in the west; with redefining concepts and
introduction of methods of systematization; which was accepted in all fields,
barring or rearranging of old principles, did not break the continuity of the
understanding; instead of changed principles opened up new ways and dimensions
that gave human race new tools and techniques. Change in the perspective of
understanding of the science of materials and basic concepts in accordance with
that gave rise to certain applications more supportive to technological
development leading to a favorable atmosphere for experimental research
process. Acceptance and application of the new concepts like the quantum
theory, relativity principle or atomic structure in pure sciences provided a
foundation for the development of experimental research techniques. True
experiments were thus possible in all settings.


Here the difference in current and ancient science becomes
starkly cognizable. Modern science started becoming more reductionist trying to put one to one co-relation as against the traditions
holistic approach of addressing complexity in one go. On the other hand the
majority of the scientists from the traditional sciences did not take serious
cognizance of the challenge posed by new or changed fundamentals and in turn
did not make use of the new knowledge to interpret or contemporarize the heritage they carried. They went in
to a shell or in defensive state that has led to hazy and misguiding picture of
Ayurveda for a while. Thus
being much practiced Ayurveda is
always painted only as an inferential old science. Now the picture is
changing. Therefore to find the facts and to assess where Ayurveda does stand today, in terms of research
process some of the methods, which are reflected in Ayurveda are elaborated below.


If someone has a question in mind like what are the
principles of research in Ayurveda
then there is nothing such as principles of research of any science
including Ayurveda. To find out the relationship between cause and
effect is the only one principle of research common to science as a whole.
Principles are of the science stream where one applies the mind to find truth
or to solve a problem. Research is a science of methods employed to gain
knowledge about a particular relationship based on principles related to that
phenomenon. If someone aims at finding out how effective a new chemical is
which when added to petrol, reduces consumption of petrol and increases
mileage then this research is designed using principles of physics and
chemistry. This is true about any research problem. 


For convenience of understanding, approach of the present
article is comparison and matching of current or modern knowledge about
research with the same from three main treatises  Charaka Samhitaa, Sus`hruta
Samhitaa and Asht`aanga Hridaya.


Definitions and elaboration:

All the basic level research is defined as a process to
find the truth. At the operational level the steps involved to find the truth
are:


Conceptualization of an idea
Hypothesis development based on principles and theories
supporting the hypothesis 
Collection of data considering appropriate variables
Verification of hypothesis through experimentation and
analysis of collected data
Acceptance or modification or rejection of hypothesis 
Strengthening of the underlying principle 


The exercise is completed with the help of tools.
Depending on different kinds of applications theories differ and so also the
tools. The whole process is interwoven in the treatises of Ayurveda except for the conduction of
experiments in todays sense. As mentioned earlier more explicit and aggregate
elaboration about the theories is available in Charaka Samhitaa than in all the remaining treatises; with
reference to contexts at various places. One has to compile without losing the
reference and essence of the underlying thought. 


The terms that reflect the above-stated phenomena are
listed below with possible co-relation to current terms [italics indicate
implied meaning]



Unknown:
     Anukta: undocumented, in
     experienced, implicit. Completely new fact regarding disease
     manifestation, drug, instrument, technique etc.
Research:
     Anusandhaana: synonyms: Anves`han`a, Gaveshan`a, Paryeshan`a
Tools:
     Hetu or Upalabdhikaran`a or Karan`a.
     It includes four types of Pramaan`a.
     It is the theme explaining universal process of conduction and appraisal
     of any kind of research.




Pratyaksha
Anumaana
Aitihya
Yukti




Materials and Methodology or
     factors of protocol development: Yukti
     is a process of management of thoughts, ideas, concepts and course of
     action.

Drug: Karan`a: Bheshaja:
      Medicine of all types, equipment, instrument etc. in case of raw drugs
      and formulations parameters of quality are expected to be specified. 


Points b and c together comprise selection and
exclusion criteria. 


Patient: Aaturades`ha or Kaaryades`ha: classification of
      patients depending on ten parameters. It is important to decide the dose
      of the medicine under study.
Disease specifications: Kaaryayoni.


Points d and
e specify the study methodology based on rational considerations 


Setting of study: Des`ha  Adhisht`haana: geographical area or study location which
      gives an idea about the natural climatic conditions, as well as genetic
      or racial make up, of socio-economic status of the subjects in study.
      Identification of co-existence of humans and drug in a given setting is
      important from the viewpoint of symbiotic relationship. It is now
      accepted that these factors contribute to the efficacy, which is
      applicable to generalized assessment of mass health.
Time period of study:


Kaala  Rituayan Roopa  Specific atmospheric conditions in different
seasons have a role in efficacy and certain procedures related to Panchakarma as stipulated to be
conducted in a specific season only. Moreover the prescription method of a
medicine is expected to be stated here as it is closely associated with time of
day and food intake in accordance with the type of disease
Study
duration



Conduction of study: Pravritti  all the factors that
      take part in the study should be available and work in coordination. This
      may be interpreted as research management that includes data, funds, time
      and human resource.
Criteria of assessment: Kaarya-Anumaana  The general characteristics indicative of quality
      of life should be considered but emphasis should be given to the change
      in the cardinal signs and symptoms of the disease.




Results: Kaarya: Avasthaantara 
     This is co-related with objectives for which research activity is
     conducted. This may be interpreted as expected effect / end result.
     Positive change in disease leading to promotion of health. 
Analysis: Kaaryaphala and Anubandha  Confirmation of broader
     aim or baseline principle that is persistent for reasonable duration of
     time [efficacy]. The result may be good or bad. It is important to
     consider dimension of time to know recurrence or non-recurrence.
     Prediction of maintenance of healthy status after stopping of treatments.
Discussion: Sambhashaa Vaada
Conclusion: Siddhaanta or Nirn`aya
Method of presentation:

Oral: Sambhaashaavidhi Vaadamaarga: these are guidelines of oral
      presentation
Written: Pratidnyaa  Siddhaanta, Panchaavayava
      Vaakya: these are the criteria of good writing
Method of critical analysis
      of research document: S`hastrapareekshaa,
      Tantrayukti, Tantra Dosha, Taachchhilya, Vyaakhyaa,
      Kalpanaa : these are guidelines
      and rules to be followed in assessment of scientific literature.

Raw drug: Aushadha
Concept of formulation
     development: Kalpanaa
Formulation: Kalpa. A single finished drug or
     compound
Drug activity parameters: Dravyakarma: Rasa, Gun`a, Veerya, Vipaaka, Prabhaava
Efficacy: Karma
Pharmacodynamics: Upaaya
Interaction: Kriyaasamkara
Authentic Scientific text: Tantra or S`haastra
Compendia: Samhitaa
Handbook : Samgrahagrantha
Encyclopedia : Kos`ha
Commentary: Vyaakhyaa or T`eekaa
Statement or hypothesis under
     consideration: Pratidnyaa
Rational: Hetu. It is reasoning behind the
     hypothesis established with the help of tools
Example: Udaaharan`a: Drisht`aanta
Establishment of hypothesis
     based on interpretation: Upanaya
Propounding of statement at
     the end of discussion: Nigamana
Editing: Pratisamskaara backed up by literary research for addition of
     new knowledge 
Observation : Dars`hana
Inquiry: Pras`hn`a
Direct examination : Spars`ha
Principle: Tatva
Examination methods: Pareekshaa
Quantitative examination: Dravyatah Pareekshaa
Qualitative examination: Gun`atah Pareekshaa
Combination of examination
     methods: Ubhayatah Pareekshaa



Classifications: 
A careful analysis of Ayurveda treatises reveals that there is a comprehensive approach regarding
research along with research processes discernible in different categories
according to expected focus or direction of thought, within a frame of
reference. The broad categories, objectives and methodology to conduct research
with a particular focus are as follows:
Clinical
research
Drug
research
Literary
research
Epidemiological
Fundamental


The classification is for the understanding of the
predominant characteristics of each type. In practice all types intermingle
with each other at various points depending upon crux of the topic.





Fundamentatal research


Epidemiological research


Clinical research








Drug research


Literary research









Types of research


Clinical research

Clinical
research is defined, as a prospective study to evaluate any intervention, be it
preventive, diagnostic or therapeutic against a control inhuman subjects.
Another definition quotes, Clinical trial is carefully and ethically designed
experiment with the aim of answering some precisely framed question  Sir
Austin Bradford Hill. The definition suggests that clinical research is
different from practice of medicine. Practice is aimed at the well being of a
patient in spite of changes in drugs, diet and therapy as needed. Research aims
at finding out the exact role of intervention in a particular situation or
condition and therefore is focused. 


Objectives


To
understand the therapeutic efficacy, preventive, promotive, therapeutic actions
and 
 Also adverse reactions, of
the drugs in the disease which are not documented or experienced due to the
enormity of manifestations of abnormal
conditions.
To
study the reasons of relapse of disease; effect of known drugs or treatment
methods in a different dose or duration to control or avoid relapse.

3. To assess
the role of dietary and behavioral restriction or positive environment in cure.
In other words to study all the factors responsible in treatment of and to
achieve the complete cure of a disease. 

The
subtypes of clinical research with respect to current definition can be seen
according to the focus of topic:


Oral
drug  Treatment
using single or compound formulation [S`hamana
Chikitsaa  internal medication]


Behavioral  Treatments for psychological
disorders. This is classified under Yuktivyapaas`hraya
Chikitsaa which are termed as non-drug methods  threatening, sedation,
massage, stress release, counseling  to help the patient understand his
problem and facilitate a solution.


Therapy Panchakarma  S`hodhana 
Vamana, Virechana, Basti, Nasya,
Raktamokshan`a. Yogic postures to treat some orthopaedic problems and exercises in particular
conditions


Surgical
treatments 
Application of different surgical techniques in all the branches.


Methodology - Though there are subtypes of
clinical research; due to practical modifications in accordance with the focal
issue; basic understanding of methodology or rules for all the types do not
change. The important factors in methodology are drug, equipment or instrument,
patients, disease condition under study and setting of the study. Specification
of all these are listed as below:


Karan`a  The
word denotes any material, which can be a medicine, tools like enema bag,
surgical instrument, medicinal leech etc, with reference to context. The
quality assurance of the drug is done based on soil type, cultivation and
harvesting techniques etc. or that of instrument carries utmost importance and
is written in detail. The prescription method of the medicine under study is specified
according to the rules of drug administration with respect to time of day and
food intake. 


Kaaryayoni  Here
it is expected that the framework of the disease condition under study should be
stated clearly. The classification of disease is important. Whether it is
curable or incurable that needs continuous treatment; whether new or chronic,
systemic or local. The cardinal signs and symptoms under consideration should
be defined precisely. Method of examination of the particular condition should
be described.


Aaturades`ha  A
rational understanding of any human being is achieved depending on some basic
parameters. Thee are Prakriti, Vikriti, Saara, Samhanan, Pramaan`a, Saatmya, Satva, Aahaars`hakti, Vyaayaamas`hakti, Vaya which
help put any person in a typical set, for better judgment of the effect and to
reduce the bias generated from extraneous or sometimes attribute variables. The
method gives accurate results because each factor considered here has a
significant role in both healthy and disease conditions. Careful selection of
patients considering all factors together leads researcher more close to the
true results. The outline is comparable to selection and exclusion criteria of
patients according to the set classification. It is also important to decide
the dose of the medicine under study for the selected patient.


Bhoomides`ha:
Geographical area or study location which gives an idea about the natural
climatic conditions, as well as of genetic or racial make up and
socio-economical status of the subject in study. Identification of co-existence
of humans and drug in a given setting is important from the viewpoint of
symbiotic relationship. Specific atmospheric conditions in different seasons
have a role in efficacy and certain therapy procedures are conducted in a
specific season only.


Kaarya : Kaaryaphala and Anubandha: These are measure with respect
to the topic under study. For example, burning sensation is one complication of
diabetes [Prameha-Vaataja-Madhumeha]. Yas`hada Bhasma has
some control over Madhumeha Sampraapti.
The main tool here is Pratyaksha.
The work is carried out by the researcher employing the above-mentioned
parameters.


Clinical
research examples:
The clinical research process is evident at various places in the Samhitaa_s. One or two are quoted here.


In the treatment of Kusht`ha external application of
     medicines should be administered only after S`hodhana [removal of Dosha
     by Panchakarma technique]. Otherwise
     it leads to increase in the symptoms instead of cure. The two quotes
     undoubtedly indicate outcome of practical experience in many cases and are
     not just a guideline.
Introduction of minerals and
     metals as medicines in Ayurveda, took place at a later stage. These
     medicines were tried to relieve specific diseases. The record of efficacy
     and adverse drug reaction of a mercurial preparation titled Makaradhvaja is proof of clinical
     experience.



Clinical
research comment:
A clinical research project is designed on the basis of Yukti a systematic, intelligent arrangement of thought based on Aaptopades`ha known facts about the
topic; conducted Pratyaksha  in
specified precise setting; with Anumaana
 expected outcome or inference. When the work is complete it can be added
to Aitihya a written document.
There are no references to the designs like randomized controlled trials or
longitudinal methods but the theme method can be co-related to case control
studies which are now being supported by WHO considering individuality. Also
keeping the meaning at the core intact, new thinking can be developed.


Drug research 

Drug is
the most important factor in treatment because it is the real material tool,
which cures. The approach of research in medicine is drug centered all the
time. Other tools of treatment like counseling get comparatively less
prominence than the drug. Therefore scope of drug research is very wide.
Ultimately, clinical research is a proliferation of drug research which has
been studied separately for convenience or understanding.


Objectives:


To find out the medicinal
     properties or pharmacology of any new or unknown drug.
To use the known drugs for
     new application or efficacy in new manifestations of diseases.
To study a drug used in folk
     or local tradition with scientific perspective of Ayurveda in order to add it to the Ayurvedic
     repertory I.e. to
     conduct pharmacognostical studies.
To develop new dosage forms
     from new drugs and to modify existing forms using new techniques. To
     conduct drug development based on principles of formulation to manage new
     health problems.
To study the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of unknown drugs and new
     formulations in different doses and variety of settings. To verify therapeutics
     with respect to primary actions, secondary actions.
To note toxicity and adverse
     reactions, if any, of a drug in a particular dose.



Methodology


Drug
research has a wider scope as it deals with all the aspects of a drug. The
method varies depending on a particular aspect under study. Therefore subtypes
in drug research are pharmacognosy, pharmaceutics, pharmacology including
therapeutics and toxicology. It is must to note that research in any of the
above direction is conducted with medicines prepared under strict observance of
quality assurance parameters. Each type is elaborated below with reference to
the context.


Pharmacognosy:

Identification
of raw material is of utmost importance and at times of crisis, help should be
taken from local people who are regular users of plants, specification
regarding nature or morphology of the plant which in turn depends on soil type
and regional agro-climatic conditions i.e.
habitat; and collection or harvesting season; are monitored for quality. The
nature of a drug is tested based on the direct examination by Panchendriya Pareekshaa because the
drugs are Paanchbhautika. According
to test results the drugs are classified into Paarthiva, Aapya, Taijasa,
Vaayaviya, and Naabhasa categories depending on the predominance of one of the
five constituting Bhoota for the
convenience of understanding. This hypothesis comes close to an accurate
knowledge of the constitution type of drug on which judgment is built, about
its processing, formulation and activity.


Criteria
of best quality drug:


The
single drug, which can be converted into many dosage forms, having high
potential, multi-dimensional efficacy and easy availability is the best drug.
Comment:
Correct identification is an important pre-step, on which actual
pharmaco-therapeutics is dependant.
This fact is stressed upon in all the treatises though the drugs were forest
produced and use of local talent at controversial time is a wise mans best
attitude.


Pharmaceutics:

Pharmaceutics
is the next step towards effect. This is the most interesting part, which deals
with enormous possibilities of drug development. It is amazing to note that the
treatises never restricted to a fixed number of formulations rather always keep
open ways to new possibilities. The main objective of phamaceutics is to bring palatability to the drugs
along with its better availability for targeted efficacy in the body in a small
dose.


Pharmaceutical
quality assurance emphasizes on the method of harvesting and preservation where
principles like comparative selection considering parameters like habitat,
season, maturity, Vipaaka, Veerya, and Rasa are adopted. Moreover storage techniques and use of container
is specified according to characteristics of individual drug items like fresh,
dry, poisonous, expensive etc. the core section of pharmaceutics i.e. processing is elaborated with the
help of principles of drug development with reference to the following factors



Number of drug in a
     formulation: Samkhyaa. On the basis
     of creative imagination towards desire efficacy then number of ingredients
     in a formulation id decided
Proportion of ingredients of
     a formulation:

Parimaan`a: each ingredient in the formulation is added in a particular
      amount according to its properties in relation to the desire efficacy.
Quantity: Raas`hi Total amount of the
      formulation is calculated by summation of all. The general rules
      regarding proportion of dried drugs as against fresh drugs are led down.

Concept of Synthesis: Samyoga  means to combine more
     than two drugs to form a new compound. The combination is designed
     depending on the Paancbhautika nature
     of each ingredient, which eventually is expressed in terms of Rasa, Gun`a, Veerya, Vipaaka and Prabhaava in the context of
     activity. The emphasis is put on concept of Viruddha Veerya because drugs are Veeryapradhaana. At the same time the concept of synthesis is
     exemplified using Rasa-Dosha Sannipaata which can be
     extrapolated to the rest of the factors. The exact understanding of one to
     one relationship between cause and effect is difficult due to complexity
     of drugs on one hand and that of disease on the other yet it is desirable
     to rationalize each factor of both the units to decide the true relationship
     between the two sequential addition of drugs in a formulation and end
     result of the formulation is predicted based on synergistic and
     antagonistic viewpoint. The drugs possessing similar characteristics or
     properties, when blended to form a compound, synergistically. The drugs
     possessing dissimilar or opposite properties when combined, reduce or
     neutralize unwanted characteristics of the target ingredient and make the
     combination effective yet non toxic. It is elaborated that the final
     effect is a cumulative effect of the compound and not of any individual
     ingredient in the compound. To reach the stepwise conclusive understanding
     of development of any formulation; first one has to realize the cumulative
     effect of Rasa then to infer
     the cumulative effect of Dravya and
     finally of disease. This relates to the theory of Rasa-Dosha Sambandha
Division of the whole: Vibhaaga  In the context of
     pharmaceutics it is related to divide a formulation in uniform does to
     administer to individual patient according to the need. It is not the
     separation of all ingredients in the formulation. E.g. each tab of Tribhuvanakirti is Samyoga of 10 drugs and it is one
     tablet of 125 mg strength.
Methods of processing: Samskaara: Karan`a

The Samyoga is
brought about by Samskaara. Samskaara is the key to fetch a desired
change in the set of physical, chemical and biological properties of the drugs.
The raw drugs are processed by various methods appropriate for each drug. These
include washing using water, boiling, heating, churning, trituraton, marinating
and more. Varieties of apparatus are used for the processing and the process is
carried out in a particular area [pharmacy], climatic condition, for particular
time period to get a good quality medicine.

Criteria of assessment of
     finished products: These are explained along with the description of
     individual product. They are based on organoleptic tests and for some dosage forms specific other practical
     tests are advocated.
Stability of the product:
     This is not explained in detail but while elaborating unwanted effects of
     a drug, the word Puraan`a is
     used to indicate outdated medicine.
Repetitions for perfection: Abhyaasa. In formulation
     development, repetitions of the process lead to refinement of the finished
     product.



Quality
of best formulation:
A formulation has to be simple to administer, fast acting in minimal dose and
without any untoward effects. It is possible to design infinite formulations
using one drug or combining many potential drugs on the basis of correct understanding
of complexity stated above, involved in the process. Therefore to predict or
limit the exact number of formulations is difficult. 


Comment: This is a guideline which, may
further be extended and brought into practicality by employing new technologies
of manufacturing and combinatorial chemistry techniques in virtual laboratory
for drug designing.


Pharmacology:


This
section deals with the action of medicine  single drug or compound formulation.
How a medicine acts; what change it brings in the status of Dosha_s; how it moves in the body or
what transformation it undergoes once in the body system is studied in
pharmacology. 


Pharmacodynamics:
The thrust of analysis is upon attributes [Gun`a]
and the specific function [Prabhaava].
Pharmacodynamic research is generally
focused on the five factors, which are elaborated as Rasa, Gun`a, Veerya, Vipaaka, Prabhaava. If
the medicine is developed from a single drug then the efficacy can be explained
with the help of three features  Dravyaprabhaava.
Gun`a Prabhaava or both. The dynamics
of any particular formulation for primary and secondary expected action is
examined with respect to some aspects namely:



the specific dosage form
     which is developed using creative imagination
its potency [Veerya] is judged by the site of
     action and time period for which drugs is available at that site
target organ or etiopathology or stage and condition of disease
     [Adhikaran`a] 
in a specific season [Kaala]
mode of action [Upaaya]
the action [Karma  there are 50 main
     categories which in turn relate to Doshaavasthaa]
     and 
the ultimate effect or
     feeling of well-being [Phala]



This is
verified by actual results on the patients. If a multi-ingredient formulation is
designed, applying creative thinking based on knowledge of factors like
synthesis elaborated in pharmaceutics, then the final cumulative effect of the
compound of the body is rationalized by applying the guidelines described to
identify the Rasa-Dosha Sambandha and drug  disease
relationship. The efficacy may be due to cumulative Rasa, Veerya, Vipaaka, Gun`a etc of the compound formulation or single drug. To find out
the rational in each set of drug  disease is the pharmacological research
pertaining to dynamics. This concept opens possibilities for development of
innumerable formulations.


Pharmacokinetics: The study deals with the
movement of a drug in the body. Here the principles which are explained in
relation to food may be applied to drugs because, drugs when administered
orally follow the same route that of food. There are three types
of distribution viz. selective distribution [Khale Kapota], sequential distribution 
[ Kedaara Kulyaa] and direct yet immediate
distribution [Ksheer-Dadhi Nyaaya]. A clear statement
regarding time of action of drugs mentions that activity of aphrodisiacs is seen immediately and that of all the
other medicines within 24 hours. Another reference elaborates some symptoms,
which are indicative of complete metabolism of medicine in the body. If the
expected efficacy is not achieved within seven days duration then it is advised
to discontinue the drug and after some gap, to avoid interaction, new treatment
should be commenced. There is no specific record however, of an individual
medicines action in a specific span with a few exceptions like Aarogyavardhini and Gandhaka Kalpa in later texts.


Pharmaco-therapeutics:
This
branch is generally merged with pharmacology. In the context of modern
medicines, the study of a new chemical entity is incomplete without knowing its
action in a particular dose, frequency and administration method in a
particular disease condition. But during last decade or two, studies are
planned and conducted on known medicines or formulation to see other affects in
various dose schedules. The famous example is of aspirin as an anti-platelet
drug.


A similar
concept is the best proof in Ayurveda. There are fifty types of primary
action. They are sub classified into therapeutic, preventive and promotive categories. In each action group there
are ten individual plants capable of achieving the effect singly and in
combination thus leading to 500 end products. The therapeutic studies for any
drug are designed considering factors like a particular dose of the medicine, a
prescription technique consisting of Anupaana,
time of day, before or after meals, to treat a particular disease, in a person
of particular constitution; to assess whether it eliminates the vitiated Dosha or pacifies it.


To exemplify,
the drug Pippali [Piper longum]
possesses two primary actions; digestive [ Deepaniya]
and appetizer 
[ Triptighna]. Another drug Haridraa [Curcuma longa] is included
into anti-dermatosis [[Kusht`haghna] as well as in poison
anti-dote [Vishaghna] action groups.
In other words one drug does possess more than one main therapeutic action in
different dosage forms, doses, different prescription schedules according to
administration time and with respect to season and other factors. Based on thee
principles pharmaco-therapeutic studies of various combinations can be
designed. The best example of pharmaco-therapeutics is the development of
potent medicines known as Bhasma,
from mineral-metal sources by treating them with medicinal herbs. Rasas`haastra [Rasa is mercury] became a special branch of Ayurveda in the later era during first century
AD. Therapeutic efficacy of these metallic preparations and herbo-mineral
preparations added new dimensions to treatment. 


The
therapeutics also focuses on relationship between food and drug. Efficacy of
the medicine is increased if some type of food items are consumed during the
course of treatment and it decreases with some other types of food. To
exemplify; during the treatment of Vran`a
the patient must avoid salty, sour and hot and heavy foods which negatively
influence the rate of cure. Instead he should consume moderately heavy,
soothing, and tasty but non-spicy food. Also he should not indulge in exertive
acts or take a nap in the afternoon, which adversely influences cure. The
concept of Pathya and Apathya not only is restricted to food
but also is stretched to exercise and behavior patterns, which have a definite
role in cure.


A
completed study of known drugs to treat unknown disease conditions must be undertaken
considering the variables Dosha, Aushadha, Des`ha, Kaala, Baala, S`hareera, Aahaara, Saatmya, Satva, Prakriti and Vaya. This is the best guideline, which
propounds the role of each and every variable in the process of cure.


Comment:
Thus the therapeutics
in Ayurveda can be co-related
to the concept of clinical pharmacology in its entirety. Various approaches can
also be co-related with dose response studies, effect of presence of food in
stomach during drug administration etc. 


Toxicity
and Incompatibility / Intolerance:

Along
with therapeutics the concept of adverse reaction and toxicity is also
explained. Adverse reactions are defined as the harmful effects occurring with
does intended for therapeutic effect. Toxicity is the direct action of the
drug at high dose, damaging cells. Intolerance is a low threshold to the normal
pharmacological action of drug. Normally a medicine or therapy is administered
to patients by taking all precautions but as the efficacy depends on many
factors; misjudgment of one or two may lead to adverse reactions. These may be
seen due to a substandard drug too. There are other possibilities that patients
are not always knowledgeable [Dnyaapaka]
and may furnish misinformation
unintentionally or the treating Vaidya is
in-experienced. 


Examples
of adverse drug reactions are evident in the texts. The detailed
contra-indications mentioned for Vamana,
Virechana and Basti have originated from the understanding of adverse reactions
of the procedures. In Ayurveda medicated
wines are administered in treatment of various conditions. Medicated wines have
a positive effect on all the sense organs and intellect. At the same time it
develops toxicity it prescribed to those for whom it is contra-indicated or
consumed in excess dose. The toxicity of Copper [Taamra] is mentioned in the very first chapter of Charaka Samhitaa as an example. In the
texts of Rasas`haastra, toxicity of
each and every material used as a drug source in raw or partially processed
form is documented. Antidotes of each one are mentioned too. A guideline
regarding therapeutics states that many medicines are intolerable to children,
elderly, thin and fragile ladies in their normal therapeutic dose, which give
rise to certain adverse effects. In such cases the doses are altered to suit
the needs of the patient.


Comment:
Though these are not comparable to the toxicity studies conducted today but are
more valuable as these are generalized conclusions of toxic effects on
patients. They point towards retrospective inferences.


Drug
Research Examples:
The formulation Pippali Ksheera that
is Piper longum processed in milk is
advised and not Pippali Kashaaya.
Similarly use of Centella asiatica juice, Glycerrhiza glabra powder or
Convolvulus pluricaulis paste with
milk to achieve the Medhya effect [nootropic] points out that a
particular dosage form along with a particular Anupaana is administered to achieve a specific pharmacological
action is nothing but a conclusion after research. Another example comes from a
later text like Bhaavprakaas`ha. Chopachinee [Smilex china] a plant of Chinese origin is identified for its Rasa Veerya, Vipaaka, Gun`a and Karma.
Its action is best seen in powder form than decoction, in inflammatory
conditions of joints and second or third stage or venereal diseases. 


Drug
Research Comment:
At this point it is a must to note that the understanding of Ayurveda with respect to drug quality assurance,
toxicity, antidotes, and efficacy is similar to the current understanding. The development
of dosage forms like Parpat`ee or Pot`t`ali are concrete examples of drug
development process through research where herbs and minerals  metals are
processed together. It is obvious from the above data that the factors, which
must be considered accountable for the quality of a drug, do not end with the
drug but they encompass the particular patient and the particular etiogenesis.
To elaborate further; the Q factor depends on all thee variables and not on one
or two. Rather, if any one of the whole set is not fulfilled then there can be
a change in the expected or predicted efficacy. 


To
emphasize the point further; it becomes crystal clear that any Ayurvedic drug
cannot be labeled standard based only on its chemical reactivity pattern but has
to be standardized on the specific biological or biochemical responses. This
can only happen in live tissues and therefore biological models may help not
only to understand the mechanism of action but also as a counterbalance to
develop a marker to know whether the drug is standard or not. The guidelines to
develop the profile of any unknown drug right from its identification to its
therapeutic use are elaborated in the texts. Some details may be added due to
technological advancement but the theme remains unchanged. 


The
original thought of using existing drugs to treat new disease or new syndromes
is clearly evident in Charaka Samhitaa.
This may be the first attempt towards clinical pharmacology because the
parameters are clearly laid down to initiate such use of medicine in unknown
situations. 


Literary Research

Introduction:

Literature
is the means to transfer knowledge from generation to generation. New knowledge
that is acquired is stored in literature. Literature is generated by
intellectuals in the society for various purposes like entertainment, spread of
information, dissemination of technical details and many more. As mankind is
enriched with many races and communities region wise; literature also develops
in all possible ways. Generally, till the last century literature used to
originate in the mother tongue of the persons, writing it. Over the time, form,
structure and style of writing has been designed based upon the thought process
of the experts in the field and then a definite set of rules and conventions
evolved according to the type of the information to be communicated.
Development of new knowledge, in other words understanding the phenomenon of
life in all respect, is a continuous process, which is expressed using
language. New words are coined. Every language gets enriched with time due to
the cross-cultural interactions taking place between the people. Not only goods
are exchanged when two different communities come together but there is a
cultural exchange as well.


Meanings
change through decades and centuries with reference to contexts. New concepts,
ideas are propounded. Some of them always remain at the forefront while some
others are recorded but ignored or forgotten. However literature maintains a
continuous thread of knowledge diversities. At times it becomes essential to
trace the literature to explore an unexplored possibility. It initiates
knowledge based on imagination. Literary study encompasses all these factors,
which strengthen the knowledge base. It is a must to note that there is
difference between the standard meaning of literary research and that of Ayurvedic
literary, research. In the original sense the term literature is
associated with presentation of human emotion and the term literary theory is
linked to artistic writing. In the context of Ayurveda literature, these terms may not be
useful because Ayurvedic literature is scientific material generated
through many centuries to disseminate the information regarding the science of
health. It has followed the rules of writing, which existed at the time of
development of the Ayurvedic literature.
As Ayurveda has been practiced
for more than 2500 years, there exists a considerable amount of contemporary
literature generated in each century to address relevant health problems. Thus
it becomes essential to focus on literary research in terms of content rather
than its artistic aspects. This process is defined in the treatises as follows:


Objectives:


To verify the principles of
     methods of development in the light of changed situation of usage of Ayurvedic terminology and frame of
     reference.
To understand the changes
     that took place in structure and form of scientific literature
To know and organize original
     meanings and changes in the shades of various technical sentences [Arthayojanaa]
To understand the process of
     development of any concept and its application chronologically 
To identify grasp and learn
     different thought processes and get new clues leading to application
To contribute new knowledge
     through development of good contemporary literature based on present day
     applications.



Materials
and methodology:

There are
two processes involved in literary research; how to analyze literature
critically and how to write.
Materials:
the main materials are literature of various types:


S`haastra or Tantra
Samhitaa
Samgrahagrantha Nighant`ugrantha
Kos`ha
Vyaakhyaa
Textbooks and 
Recently published works in
     the form of papers, records, reports, articles etc. 



Except
for the last one, all other types of literature were available in manuscript
form in those days till the innovation of printing. Method of literary research
of manuscripts to prepare correct document for printing is known as
manuscriptology. Since the 18th century the material were available
in printed form. The guideline in Sus`hruta
Samhitaa underlines that to acquire complete knowledge about anything it is
a must to read and analyze a variety of treatises and all types of literary
works. It further advocates that reading together relevant scientific works
along with continued study of ones own science and discussions leads to
enlightenment of intellect.


Methodology

A] Critical analysis methods

To
analyze literature critically it has to be examined from three viewpoints:

Chronologically, geography,
     authorship and overall societal set up reflected in the literature
Structure of a selected
     material: form, style and language etc.
Content: meaning conveyed
     through literature


In the Ayurvedic treatises there are references regarding
all the three aspects.


Chronology
aspect: The
explanations regarding chronology, geographical areas etc. are covered in each
text in the initial chapter only. Various practices regarding food habits, dressing
of different races of people with their genotypic and phenotypic characters are
also explained at different places with reference to context. Descriptions of
people taking part in conferences are noted in apt words to enable the reader
to a view of his background. These are some examples to explain the above
points.


Structure
Aspect:
Literature shows a particular type of structure when the main three treatises 
Charaka Samhitaa, Sus`hruta Samhitaa and Asht`aanga
Hridaya are scrutinized. They are Sthaana
 part, Adhyaaya  chapter, and Sootra  verse. Also each chapter is
structured to fit in a pattern of introduction, elaboration and summary of a
topic. All the topics are covered in a logical sequence. Predominant form is
poetic with some prose at places for better explanation.


In the
later compendia 10th century onwards, including Laghutrayee, the chapter pattern remains same but that of parts i.e. Khan`d`a and of other arrangement
is different. This itself is an evidence of literary research. Post 18th
century the literature is written in prose form and not in poetic. Language of
interpretation has also changed from Samskrita to regional ones and in
recent years it has changed to English; though the principle of structural
analysis is the same. 


How to
analyze a document critically, starts from selection. The text or literature
has to come from the domain of well-known, successful, eminent and intelligent
scientific fraternity; then only it is considered authentic.



Target reader: Serve to any
     type of learner: advanced, average, poor
Style of writing: The
     standard style of abstract, elaboration, and summary
Title: Self explanatory,
     accurate
Method of writing: Use of terminology,
     grammatically correct yet meaningful use of words and sentences; coverage
     of the topic of discussion in logical sequence without confusion of
     thoughts and easily understandable with appropriate examples. No
     repetition of the same thing  words, sentences etc. 



These
guidelines help to understand the structure in detail.


Content Aspect:
This aspect is well explained in Charaka Samhitaa. The parameter is elaborated under the umbrella
term Tantrayukti which means the
methodology or technique or systematic approach of studying a Tantra to interpret its correct and
unambiguous meaning for its practical application. There are total 36 major and
4 minor Tantrayukti_s. The number of Tantrayukti_s differs according to Samhitaa. It depends on the authors
viewpoint of expression and his judgment about confusing statements. He
propounds use of those specific Tantrayukiti_s
for the benefit of the readers. The difference is practically negligible
and all the important treatises follow the same types of Tantrayukti_s.


Adhikaran`a
Tantrayukti denotes
subject [Ingrammatical sense], which
can be of the entire science or of its part or of a chapter or of subpart of a
chapter or of a single sentence. Similarly if one gets confused to establish
the co-relation with one set of Dosha as
Vaayu, Pitta, Kapha and another
set of Karma Basti, Vireka, Vamana, then Vidhaana Tantrayukti helps to solve the problem. Vidhaana means orderly and systematic
placement. It becomes easy to understand that Basti, Vireka and Vaman procedures are employed for Vaayu, Pitta, Kapha respectively.
Each Tantrayujkti plays a specific
role here. The literature must comply on the parameter of Tantrayukti to receive critical acclaim.


Another aspect of examining the Tantra is Vaakyas`hah, Vaakyaarthas`hah and Arthaavayavas`hah which indicates
concept of Panchaavayava Vyaakya. It
means that the literature is examined as a whole on comprehensive level to
grasp its total content; further it is examined in detail to get the theme and
principle, elaborate and concise descriptions wherever necessary, in the
standard pattern of statement or hypothesis, rational of the hypothesis,
supportive and appropriate general examples, establishing the hypothesis with
logical explanation. One more feature is to assess whether an attempt is made
to simplify the complex content to extract correct meanings for better
understanding of an average reader or not. Here the method of getting the
correct meaning through Lakshan`a interpretative
or implied meaning is applicable. The literary meaning may give a false
interpretation while implied meaning of the same words will give true
interpretation because it is associated with practical experience. 


Apart from these two main domains under content analysis
there are other parameters termed as Pramaan`a
[4types] Tools Vyaakhyaa [15] operational definitions,
Kalpanaa [9]  concepts, Nyaaya [17]  general rules and Taachchhilyaadi [17]  specific conventions;
which are examined in the process of analysis of literature. Some of thee are
related to grammar as well. The text is evaluated for presence of any of the
fifteen Tantradosha. This
highlights the complexity involved in methodology of literary research during
development of Ayurvedic literature.


B] Method of presentation of work:

The method of presentation of the work, which can be of
any type  literary, experimental or clinical  is discussed in literary
research. It can be done in two ways, either in written form or an oral
presentation. The guidelines regarding written documentation follow the same
structure used for evaluation I.e. hypothesis, establishment of study
hypothesis and null hypothesis, tools used, discussion including elaboration of
the topic under study with appropriate yet easily understandable examples,
specific conclusion, principle on which the hypothesis is based. The guidelines
regarding oral presentation are also very precise. Oral presentation happens in
a conference. For all practical purposed based on the objectives, conference
can be either scientific or purely academic oriented or showy. Participants at
both places may have three types of attitude: friendly, indifferent and
obstinate. Based on these parameters validity and authenticity of the research
done is acknowledge in the scientific fraternity. The presentation tactics to
make own impression, to neutralize other speakers are also elaborated in the
chapter. The presentation has to be within the parameters mentioned for writing
a report. Apart from these, the researcher has to be well acquainted with some
techniques, which are explained as Vaadamaarga.
He has to satisfy all the queries raised regarding the subject or topic he
presents; with properly supported justifications. In the end of this discussion
the importance of literary research is emphasized by saying that clarity of
thought and acquisition of knowledge by presentation of research work and open
discussion is must for administration of treatments to patients because
ultimately that leads a researcher to success.


Literary research examples: The best example of literary
research is of Charaka Samhitaa itself.
Its original title was Agnives`ha
Tantra after the name of its author. This text was edited by Charaka who incorporated new findings,
elaborated some concepts, changed some part from the original text to suit the
need of his time and the text was renamed as Charaka Samhitaa. Further the same process was carried out by Drid`habala to add new knowledge and to
complete the missing. One-third part of the original Charaka Samhitaa. We refer to this text today. Apart from this,
thirty-five scholars have written commentaries on the text to relate the
meaning with experience of their time. Another example is of Asht`aanga Samgraha and Asht`aanga Hridaya by Vaagbhat`aachaarya. The text is prepared
to place medicine and surgery together for the benefit of learners which is
written with reference to Charaka
Samhitaa  the bible of medicine and Sus`hruta
Samhitaa  the bible of surgery. More recent texts regarding methods of
clinical diagnosis Maadhavanidaanam written
by Maadhavakara and the handbook of
medicine Chakradatta by Chakrapaan`i are examples of
contemporary literary research because unlike the original, these are topic
oriented texts that represent the thought line prevalent in that century. 


Literary research Comment: The most important feature or
gain from literary research is realization of the thought process of
construction of theory or principle, which is, at times more valuable than the
content itself. The guidelines reflect stringent criteria which a literary work
or presentation has to comply with. Only then the scientific fraternity of the
first type accepts it. This is a remarkable feature existing even today. 


The
techniques described or factors considered for literary research seem complex
in modern days because of the main constraint of limited availability of
writing material, which is responsible for preparation of a few copies of
manuscripts of any book. It must have been quite a worthwhile. Brainstorming
exercise to express the content in a well-structured  mainly poetic  form
without hampering the exact shade of meanings. Today writing, printing and
publishing has become easily accessible and affordable to the common man. The
extra efforts of using poetic form are reduced but the basic principle of
correct usage of terminology, sentence construction, grammatical correctness
and expression in minimum possible words to convey a scientific invention and
discovery remains the same. This places Ayurveda on a higher pedestal as the best example of medical literature.


Epidemiological
research

Epidemic
is disease outbreak occurring suddenly in numbers clearly in excess of normal
expectancy. Epidemiology in its true sense is the science concerned with the
study of factors determining and influencing the frequency and distribution of
disease, injury and other health related events and their causes in a defined
human population for the purpose of establishing programmes to prevent and control their development and speed.
Epidemiological research is no different than the meaning explained above.
Currently the scope of epidemiological research is widened to the concept
health statistics of population due to inclusion of studies regarding effects
of various types of foods, habits like coffee, tea, smoking, alcohol etc.,
exercise and occupation of large population groups. These types of population
studies are described as descriptive research in sociology from where various
models like case control or time series have come. 


The
concept similar to the original meaning of epidemiology is explained under the
title Janapadodhvamsa in Charaka Samhitaa, infectious factor in Sus`hruta Samhitaa while other aspects
are taken care of in different parts like S`haareerasthaana,
Sootrasthaana etc.


Objectives:


To find out the causative
     factors which influence a basically diverse population from a particular geographical
     area at one and the same time.
To study the possible
     measures of treatment and further prevention of health of people at such
     time. To study the effect of certain types of common conditions on people
     of a particular constitution.
To find out prognosis of
     diseases under specific conditions
To verify the association
     between certain foods and habits and disease. 



Materials and Methodology
Materials:

Here the study materials are
     suffering patients fallen prey to the calamity or outbreak and the survivors.
     Those who are not affected but have witnessed also become subject for the
     study.
For the purpose of health
     statistics, healthy individuals are those, not acutely suffering from any
     conditions but are following a particular type of life style.



Methodology:
In the opening statement of the third chapter in Vimaanasthaana, Rishi Aatreya
suggests that the methodology employed to conduct this type of study is
direct observation [Pratyaksha] and
inference [Anumaana]. Experts who are
able to sense the undesired changes that take place in the normal atmospheric
conditions can predict its effects on human health based on their experience.
Similarly behavioral changes are noticed by psychologists and social scientists
that, they can predict the social behavior of the future generations. Once the
catastrophe strikes then, only relief work can take place and it should be
provided to the needy and seeking is another piece of advice by Rishi Aatreya.


The studies,
which are conducted to fulfill the above-mentioned objectives, are designed
using all four tools viz. known recorded facts [documented data], practical
experience, rational thought and logical interpretation. Moreover the main
tools are observation and inquiry. In case of direct observations the
researcher must have a keen attitude to grasp the situation under study and he
must use all the five sense organs coupled with intellect efficiency to
understand the situation. Similarly the questions must be logical, relevant,
simple and to the point to get the right kind of information. 


Epidemiological
Research Examples:
The best
food article from a group of similar articles or the best drug which has desire
effect amongst all drugs with similar effect cannot be decided unless a large
population has shared the same experience or shown the same type of result.
Also the most harmful fish is Chilachima
or eating fish and milk together leads to skin disease are the outcome,
which can be generated only after many observations, are put together. Effect
of pollution on environmental factors like air, water, soil and the measures to
be adopted in such conditions to maintain the health of people, is an example
of epidemiological study.


Epidemiological
Research Comment:
It seems
that the present methods of epidemiological research, observation and inquiry
were used with both approaches prospective and retrospective. When the
suggestions like what dietary and behavioral pattern an expecting couple
should practice if a typical progeny is expected are written then it is
indicative of prospective one. Similarly all Pitta dominant Prakriti people
suffer from blood disorders if they indulge themselves on hot taste foods,
alcohol, consumption, work under burning sun for a considerably long period is
a prospective kind of study.


In case
of guidelines of predicting death of a suffering person, or effects of Viruddha Aahaara in developing certain
skin conditions; the approach is retrospective. This statement one can make
because the science that propounds ethics in use of plants would not try
harmful things on humans. The section of Charaka
Samhitaa where these observations are recorded categorically is titled as Indriyasthaana.


Fundamental research

Dictionary meaning of the word is as follows:
Fundamental: serving as a base or foundation, essential
Principle  truth as basis of reasoning
Theory  systematic exposition of principles of science. A
theory is a set of interrelated constructs, definitions and propositions that
present a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations among variables,
with the purpose of explaining and predicting the phenomena.


However, conventionally principle and theory are used as
synonyms of each other with reference to context. In a nutshell, the true basis
of reasoning which serves as essential or as a foundation to understand a
phenomenon is known as fundamental principle. Fundamental principles are few,
which give rise to many systematic expositions called theory. Theory involves a
consideration of the principles governing practice, and different theories will
point to different kinds of practice. The natural principles behind every
phenomena happening in the universe are termed as fundamental principles of
natural science. The phenomenon may be normal or abnormal; principle remains
unchanged in the particular case. Theories are developed considering the
specific variables taking part in the particular practice. Therefore they are
applicable to that setting.


The research that is focused on fundamental principles or
theories with an aim to find out the true reasoning behind any phenomenon is
known as fundamental research. The fundamental principles are categorized into
two parts  universal and pertaining to a specific area. During ancient days
Hindu scientific ideas and methodology had deeply influenced natural philosophy
in Asia. The construction of scientific concepts and methodology to investigate
the physical phenomena as well as building up a body of positive scientific knowledge
was stored under the title Dars`hana.
There are nine Dars`hana_s, which are
grossly co-related with the modern scientific understanding. A few examples are
given below which are quoted from Pr. Brajendranath Seals book Positive Sciences of Ancient Hindus.



Saamkhya  Paatanjala system:
     Concept of original constituents and energy. Mechanical, physical and
     chemical theories. Measures of time and space, directions, molecular
     motions biology and biochemistry etc
Vedaanta  evolution of forms of matter,
     Panchikaran`a
Buddha  atomic theory
Nyaaya  Vais`heshika 
     chemistry, geometry, method of science  cause effect relationship etc 



Based on these basic sciences applied branches originated;
like Astronomy, plant biology, etc. while assessing the potential of Oriental
sciences; experts have also suggested that the Veda_s are basic sciences while Upaveda_s
are applied ones. S`hilpas`haastra is
the applied part of Rigveda, Dhanurveda is of Yajurveda, Gandharvveda is
of Saamveda and Ayurveda is applied branch of Atharvaveda. Therefore Atharvaveda talks of basic biological
principles, which are elaborated and modified according to the area of
application. Those related to plants are developed in Vrikshaayurveda, related to elephants are Hastyaaurveda and those to horses are As`hvaayurveda.


Ayurveda, which deals with the health of human beings is an
applied science, which originated from basic concepts related to ancient
biology. The basic principles are accepted and modified in Ayurveda within its frame of reference to
understand the functions taking place in the human body. The modification of
fundamental principles within the framework of Ayurveda is explained in Charaka Samhitaa 


The word Siddhaanta means
theory or fundamental principle. Siddhaanta
is defined as the ultimate true decision taken by many scientists
[unanimously] after employing various tools or methods of scientific
examination. Siddhaanta is classified
into four groups.



Sarvatantra Siddhaanta: fundamental principles
     encompassing or common to all streams of science. For example:




Saptapadaartha  Basic even concepts viz Dravya, Gun`a, Karma, Saamaanya, Vis`hesha,
      Samavaaya and Abhaava which provide the
      rationale to all types of phenomena. The search for the root of any
      function taking place n the universe has been explained or stretched up
      to the level of Saptapadaartha to
      gain true knowledge.
Navadravya  Proliferation of the first concept Dravya into nine factors Prithvi, Aapa, Teja, Vaayu, Aakaas`ha, Kaala, Dik,
      Manas and Aatmaa; which are more directory responsible for everything
      that is happening in the universe. In this way each of the remaining six
      concepts is elaborated
Paanchbhautika Siddhaanta: theory of genesis of basic
      materials by Anyonya-Anupraves`ha of Panchamahaabhoota
Lokapurusha Saamya: Elaboration of functional
      approach based on Saamaanya-Vis`hesha theory
Parin`aamavaada  Paakajotpatti:
      Law of conversion or transformation of energy.




There are many such principles. These are common to every
branch of science



Pratitantra Siddhaanta: These are the theories,
     which are propounded and applied to explain the reasoning about the
     subject matter dealt within the particular Tantra or science stream. It encompasses the entire subject.
     Some of these are listed below:




Saamkhya Purush  Group of factors must be considered to analyze a
      human being. There are other theories which consider less or more factors
      but those are not applied here
Tridosha  Vaata, Pitta, Kapha  Factors govern the live human body by all means.
Trigun`a  Satva, Raja, Tama  Factors govern mind
Agni  The factor which
      represents Teja within the
      framework of human body
Gun`a karma of Phanchbhautika substances  These are studied with respect
      to normal and abnormal body conditions
Samyoga  Vibhaaga  The concept is studied
      within the frame of drugs and diseases. These examples suggest that the
      main theories are modified to understand and analyze the phenomenon related
      to human structure and function in healthy and disease conditions.





Adhikaran`a Siddhaanta  These theories are specific to the topic under consideration.
     The topic comes under the purview of a subject, therefore Pratitantra Siddhaanta are applicable
     to the topic but on a broader level. At the core of the topic is the
     specific theory e.g. 




Garbhotpattikara Bhaava : These are application
      specific but not without Tridosha and
      Trigun`a theories
Dhaatu
Mala
Prakriti variations
Trayopastambha: Aahaara Nidraa Brahmacharya
Vyaadhihetusamgraha
      Kaalaarthakarmayoga  Heena, Mithyaa, Ati Maatraa
Sampraapti  Doshadooshya Samoorchchhanaa  to know how the disease has
      progressed
Dravya, Rasa, Veerya, Vipaaka,
      Prabhaava, Gun`a, Karma  to know how a drug acts
Samyoga
Samskaara


Chikitsaa Siddhaant Shaareera  Daiva and Yukti; Manas  Satvaavajaya
Sadya vikaara Sootra  Viparitagun`a, Des`ha, Maatraa, Kaala



Abhyupagama Siddhaanta: This category clearly reflects
     that research and development were considered at the fundamental level in Ayurveda.
     The theories and principles underlying those theories; which are newly
     proposed and which are not yet established; are put in this category. Thus
     methodology to verify new theories or even new principles is the method of
     fundamental research. As the frame of reference here is Ayurveda it covers research in fundamental
     principles adopted in Ayurveda.



Objectives:

To find
out the exact theory behind unknown disease syndromes from generated or
gathered evidence
To
provide a rational and to design method of treatment of new and unknown health
conditions based on fundamental principles
To
find out the exact cause  effect relationship between efficacies due to
particular treatment - preventive promotive
or curative  and the new unknown condition under study.


Methodology : The tools
that help to unfold the true knowledge regarding any effect are termed as Hetu. These parameters are of four
types and known as Pramaan`a_s.
Definition of Pramaan`a is Pramaa
Karan`am Pramaan`am, where Pramaa means
true positive knowledge. The tools or parameters, which enable one to reach
unto the truth, are Pramaan`a_s. Charaka Samhitaa elaborates the types of
Pramaan`a_s at three places with
reference to context. Sequentially they are listed as:

Aapta or S`habda or Aitihya  Authentic scientific evidence
documented in literature like Veda Upanishada and moreover from the devoted
scientists.
Pratyaksha  Direct, validated, logically analyzed experiences of each
individual. Any experience perceived by an individual using his sense organs
can be analyzed as gross level experience and subtle level experience which
explains the details. Also it can be classified as present experience and past
experience.
Anumaan`a  This tool operates based on the above two tools Aapta and Pratyaksha. Method of prediction or judgment is of two types;
futuristic and inferential. Futuristic prediction is based on logical analysis
of knowledge acquired through documents and past experience while inferential
judgment is based on drawing conclusions from the immediate experience.
Yukti  Designing and putting Aapta
and Pratyaksha together in a
logical way to propose answers to unknown phenomenon. This is also known as
creative thinking or management of thoughts as well as events:


One more parameter is explained
which is termed as Upamaana. It is accepted from Nyaaya-Dars`hana to exemplify certain disease conditions. It points out
similarity between two objects which may not necessarily have some common
factor but only visual similarity e.g. Dan`d`a
means stick. Cardinal sign of the disease Dan`d`aapataanaka is stiffness of the body similar to stick or Dhanusha means arch, hence the
disease where body bends like an arch of the archer is named Dhanustambha.


By employing all the tools a
researcher can analyze and find out the true relationship between cause and effect.
The relationship can be of two types Nitya
i.e. permanent and Anitya i.e. short term. The cause can be of three types  directly
responsible for the effect, associated but not solely responsible for the
effect and responsible for only a particular section or at a given moment of
effect [Samavaayi, Asamavaayi, Nimitta]


All the three factors lead to
real or true knowledge, which is of two types comprehensive or with minute
details depending on the approach of the researcher. The whole exercise of
research is done in the quest of true knowledge. It is done with the help of
theories mainly within the limit of Pratitantra
and Adhikaran`a. Change in theory
coming within the ambit of Sarvatantra leads
to the change in theories of the other two that depend on it. Change in the
principles of basic sciences reflects change in applied sciences.


Fundamental research
examples

The
twelfth chapter in Charaka Samhitaa titled
Vaatakalaakaleeya explains the
functional types of Vaata Dosha but
does not elaborate in types of remaining two Dosha_s. About a millennium later Asht`aaanga Hridaya elaborates Pitta
Dosha and Kapha Dosha in similar
fashion. The hypothesis is Pitta and
Kapha can also be classified on the
basis of functionality.
The 63
permutations and combinations arising from six Rasa_s explained in Charaka
Samhitaa are cross matched with 63 permutations and combinations
originating from three Dosha_s in Asht`aanga Samgraha
The
debate about number of Rasa documented
in Aatreya-Bhadrakapyeeya is chapter of Charaka
Samhitaa, underlines that fundamental principle regarding the number of Rasa is six. It was challenged and
various hypotheses like Rasa are two,
three or eight were tested on above-mentioned parameters with a conclusive justification
by Rishi Aatreya that Rasa_s are six.
Similarly
D`alhan`a at one place proposes that
Rakta should be considered the
fourth Dosha, which is debated by
other Dosha_s are three is
confirmed.


Fundamental Research
Comment:

A careful scrutiny of all the
types of research explained in the above article or known today or has been
practiced since ages are merely a part of the fundamental research. Literary
study is predominantly within the limit of the tool Aapta / S`habda or Aithihya; experimental or experiential
methods come within the tool Pratyaksha;
epidemiological studies are conducted using the parameter of Anumaana and Yukti encompasses all types of studies. When a study is conducted
at a single level of literary etc, then generally it is guided by established
principles unless it challenges the accepted theory. Each research problem
focusing each of the area aims at finding out true relationship between cause
and effect. All the tools must be put together to verify fundamental principle.


Principles of Fundamental
research explain the method of science. How to analyze and understand any
unknown fact is elaborated in this method. Most important fact is that the
principles have not changed over the last thousand of years and the change in
application is also not very drastic. What has changed is development of
technologies, which aid Pratyaksa and
enable oneself to acquire knowledge directly, which was not possible before.
Apart from the main body of method of science concept of bias is covered
where criteria of Aapta, Guru S`hishya, are decided. They suggest an impartial attitude and
point out that only quality should be considered. Concept of ethics is touched
upon while elaborating on the rules of collection of raw drugs or gathering
information from shepherds or behavioral conduct of Vaidya, with respect to patient.


The marvel of the scientists of
Ayurveda period is, that they
have kept open all possibilities of gaining new knowledge and have not posed themselves
as rigid followers.


Statistics in Ayurveda

Statistics is the science of
collecting and analyzing significant numerical data. Numerical means to deal
with numbers. But the numbers are understood in two ways mathematics as well as
statistics. Mathematics gives complete stepwise sets and solution exact and
unchanging, leaving no room for accepting errors while statistics keeps the
possibility of change open and gives solutions in a probabilistic manner. In
mathematics if the results differ from the expected; then it proves that the
method is wrong; but in statistics it is not so. Statistics is based on the
principle of error [or Obsolon], which deals with the allowable errors involved
in experiment. These are natural errors, which are irremovable. Statistics is
an applied science and is used in medical science, psychology, engineering,
social sciences, economics, and education.


However mathematicians and
statisticians bifurcate from one common stream of numerical data. At some point
it may be said that the method is inadequate and at other the thought has not
missed out on anything rather has a more subtle understanding of the analyzing
processes. In all the three treatises, particularly in Charaka Samhitaa, numerical values are used for a particular data.
Right from the beginning of the principles there are numerical values use to
denote five Mahaabhoota_s, three Dosha_s, three Upakrama_s, three Rogamaarga_s,
eight Mahaagada, eight Nindita etc. in the chapter Snehaadhyaaya there is a direct evidence
of presence of Saankhya people who
are trained in the philosophy of Saankhya
[numbers]. Wherever there is description regarding the thought process
about the unknown disease, drug or treatment modality statements indicative of
probability are made. The quotes saying Bhettaa
Hi Bhedyam Anyathaa Binnatti, or Tasya Vikalpaat Aparisamkhyeyaani Bhavanti
Vikalpabhedaat Aparisamkhyeyatva are indicative of the statistical thought
process.


Anything is measurable is the
principle of mathematics. It also relates to statistics, the concept of
measurement is well evident in the Ayurvedic treatises. The section Vimaanasthaana
is developed around the focal theme of measurable variables and methods of
measurement. A Vaidya must be well
versed with method of measurement of all the variables like Dosha, drug, strength, diet etc. to be
able to treat the diseases successfully. The measure is of three types
quantitative [Dravyatah], qualitative
[Gun`atah], and a combination of both
[Ubhayatah]. For example, quantity of
urine passed by a person in 24 hours is measured using the unit liters while
its color, clarity, smell are compared to standards and noted; is an example of
application of both types of measurement.


Abhaava may be reflected as principle of Obsolon. Saankhya and Nyaaya Dars`hana_s introductory part authored by Annambhat`t`a is the root of logic and
statistics. Many theories are proposed and established in this work. Deductive
and inductive analysis methods are explained in detail well before the period
of Aristotle. The concept of false positive and false negative results is
defined in the same first chapter of Saankhyadars`hana,
titled Tarkasamgraha. Forerunners
of descriptive or inferential statistical methods are evident in Tarkasamgraha.


But it cannot be compared to
the statistics of todays era, which has proliferated into a huge science with
many techniques of calculation, which leads to true knowledge. No formulae or
such other parameters are evident in the treatises. These may be available in
those days in texts of mathematics like Leelaavati
by Bhaskaraachaarya. Therefore
it can be said that the concept or theory of statistical phenomena too
originated in ancient texts to a certain extent. 


Summary 

Intelligent minds trained in the
current system of categorization of knowledge, try to analyze or judge the
ancient texts for proofs of the extent and depth of knowledge find that the
classification or contextual references seem different and therefore at times
difficult to understand. But once the answers to the three scientific questions
what, why and how are carefully gathered with a different arrangement of
available literary data, the intellectual thought process of research in Ayurvedic
texts lives up.


There cannot be one to one matching
of the methods in Ayurveda with
those, which are practiced today. As mentioned in the introduction, there are
no separate manuals on how to do research in Ayurveda as the manuals or books are available
today. This is a literary review to analyze whether research thought was
prevailing or not among the intelligent class of people practicing Ayurveda by using modern day understanding as a
yardstick. Therefore this work is an inferential work put together by compiling
and analyzing the available data from the main treatises. If someone wants to
counter question about the actual records of researches conducted or any such
supporting documents then I am afraid, it is not possible to provide any. It is
the limitation of this literature. This literature is developed on the
guidelines format and not of actual records. Moreover considering the time
span through which this science moves it does not seem possible to maintain
such records in manuscripts forms, as compared to todays advanced technology
of writing and printing etc.


There is no need for a learned
man to say that after churning loads of data, one principle is established; for
when a whole process is scrutinized it gives the crystal clear idea about the
fact that how much churning or efforts have been put to generate so many
treatises.


References:

Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji
T A, Varanasi [reprint], 2000. Vimaanasthaana 8/1 
Charaka Samhitaa ED. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan, 6th edition, 1999 Chikitsaasthana 30/292
Sharma
P V, Ayurvediya Anusandhan Paddhati,
Chaukhmbha Orientalia, Varanasi, first edition 1976
Charaka Samhitaa ED. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakasha, 6th edition
1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/33
Charaka Samhitaa ED. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakasha, 6th
edition
1999 Sootrasthaana 11/25
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharti Prakashan 6th edition, 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/87
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan, 6th
edition, 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/94
Sharma
PV, Ayurvediya Anusandhan Paddhati,
Chaukhmbha Orientalia, Varanasi, first edition 1976
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan, 6th edition, 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/84
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan, 6th
edition 1999, Vimanasthan 8/84
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan, 6th
edition, 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/84,
76 125, 26, 27, 2812 Charaksamhita
Vimansthan 8/134, Sutrasthan 11/42, Vimaanasthaana 8/84
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/84, 134
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 4/4
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/72
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/73/74
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/73/74
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/6,
8/25
Charaksamhita Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/25
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/37
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/15-18, 25-67
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/15 18, 25-67
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/30-37 Sootrasthaana 30/16-18, Vimaanasthaana 8/3
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/30-37, Sootrasthaana 30/16-18, Vimaanasthaana 8/3
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/30-37
Sootrasthaana 30/16-18, Vimaanasthaana 8/3
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/3 Siddhisthana
12/41-44 commentary, Aashtanghridaya
Uttaratantra 40/78 commentary
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Sootrasthaana 1/121;
1/71, Ashtanghridaya Uttartantra 40/78,
commentary
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Sootrasthaana 4/7
Chakrapani commentary 26/2
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Sootrasthaana 26/13
and Sushrutasamhita Sootrasthaana 42/5
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Sootrasthaana 26/13
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Sootrasthaana 35/48
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999, Vimaanasthaana 8/33
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsasthana 30/291-293, Vimaanasthaana 4/8
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsasthana 30/327-328
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha Surabharati
Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsasthan
30/330-333
WHO guideline. Friedman L.M, Fundamentals of Clinical Trial
2nd ed., Massachusetts, 1985
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 6/5 8/7 Sootrasthaana 1/11
41. Charaka
Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/87, Chakrapani
commentary Vimaanasthaana 8/87
Kalpasthana 1/7-9 Astanghrudaya Ed. Pandit Harishastri, Krushnadas
academy publication Varanasi (Reprint)
1995. Ed. Anna Kunte and Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana 19/9-14
Astanghrudaya Sootrasthaana 26/1-4, Astanghrudaya
Sootrasthaana 26/37-38 Sushrutasamhita Sootrasthaana 42/5
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 6/3, 5 Vimaanasthaana  Nidanasthana
1/9, 11 Sushrutasamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint), 1998 Sootrasthaana 42/5
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/94
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/93, 8/75
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/84
Aasht`aanga Hridaya Ed.
Pandit Harishastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint), 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and Krushnashastri Navre; Chikitsasthana
19/54, 93
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/72
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 4/4
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 4/4
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 4/4
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 4/4
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 4/4
WHO guidelines for research in traditional medicine
Aasht`aanga Hridaya Ed.
Pandit Harishashastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana 9/1
Aasht`aanga Hridaya Ed.
Pandit Harishashastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana 9/10, 41/5
Sus`hruta Samhitaa Ed.
Vaidya Jadavaji Ta, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint) 1998 Sootrasthaana
41/9, Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan , 6th Edtuib,
1999 30/291
Charaka Samhitaa ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 1/121-125,
127
Charaka Samhitaa ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati
Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/29-34
Aasht`aanga Hridaya Ed.
Pandit Harishashastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana 9/22
Charaka Samhitaa ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/11-13
Charaksamhita Vimaanasthaana 1/10
Charaka Samhitaa ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 1/126,
Sushrutasamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji Ta, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(Reprint), 1998 Sootrasthaana 1/127
Charaka Samhitaa ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Kalpasthana 1/10 Vimaanasthaana 8/87
Charaka Samhitaa ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 4/4
Ashtanghrudaya Ed. Pandit Harishastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(Reprint), 1995 Ed, Anna Kunte and
Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana
9/1-2
Aasht`aanga Hridaya Ed.
Pandit Harishashastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana 9/1-2
Charaka Samhitaa ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/11
Sushrutsamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1998 Sootrasthaana 41/4
Aasht`aanga Hridaya Ed.
Pandit Harishashastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana 9/1-2
Aasht`aanga Hridaya Ed.
Pandit Harishashastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana 9/2 Charaksamhita ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 9/7
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1 & 2 Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan, 6th edition 1999 Kalpsthana 12/50-67 Charaksamhita
Sootrasthaana 4/7 Chakrapani commentary, Chikitsasthana 1/30-31
Aasht`aanga Hridaya
Kalpasthana 2/62 Charakasamhita Ed.
Brahmanad Tripathi Vol 1 Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition, 1999 Kalpasthana 12/46
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimansthan 8/87
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/87 Sootrasthaana 26/29 Ashtanghrudaya Ed. Pandit Harishastri, Krushnadas
academy publication Varanasi (reprint)
1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and Krushnashastri Navre; Kalpasthana 1/11
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/87
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati
Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sutrasthan
26/29
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan, 6th edition 1999 Sutrasthan 26/29
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Kalpasthana 1/11
Charakasamhita Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 1/21
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 1/21
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2 Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Kalpasthana 12/100-101
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tipathi Vol 1 Chaukhambha Surabharati
Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimansthan
1/22
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol2 Chaukhambha Surabharati
Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Kalpasthana
12/45
Charaka Samhitaa Ed: Vaidya
Jadavaji TA, Chaukhambha Surabharati
Prakashan Varanasi (reprint) 2000 Sootrasthaana 26/13
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1 & 2 Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition, 1999 Sootrasthaana 2/17
Chakrapani Charakasamhita Kalpasthana 12/45
Rasadoshasannipata
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 1/8
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 1/9
Kulkarni S.D. Ayurveda Rasaushadhi Nirman first
edition, Continental Publication, Pune [981
page 287]
Charaka Samhitaa ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 1/22(3)
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan, 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 1/11
Charaka Samhitaa ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1&2 Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/29-30
Kalpasthana 12/43-48
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/34 Vimaanasthaana 1/22(2)
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 1/22
p [2] [9] Vimaanasthaana 1/22
(2)
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati
Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/30
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Kalpasthana 12/103
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi vol2, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Siddhisthana 6/28
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26
Ashtanghrudaya Ed. Pandit Harishastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and
Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana
1/28
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1 Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan, 6th edition 1999 Kalpasthana 12/50 
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1 Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan, 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/71-72
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1 Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan, 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/13

Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1 Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan, 6th
edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 1/10

Sushrutasamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji Ta, Krusnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1998 Sootrasthaana 14/10 commentary Dalhan
Ashtanghrudaya Ed. Pandit Harishastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(Reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and
Krushnashastri Navre; Sharitsthana 3/67 commentary Hemadri
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1 Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan, 6th edition 1999 Siddhisthana 6/26-27 
Sushrutasamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1998 Sootrasthaana 35/48, Dalhan
Anti-platelet Trialist collaboration
1988 Brit med j 296:320 Steering Committee 1989 New Eng J Med 321:129
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 4/8
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/87
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chi 30/298
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsasthana 30/329-333
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsasthana 25/97-98,
Sushrutasamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1998 Sootrasthaana 19/14-15, 32-36
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Kalp 1/7 Chikitsa 30/291-326
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Siddhisthana 6/28
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 29/8-10
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Charakasamhita Ed.
Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition, 1999 Siddhisthana 2/8 11,
14-15,17
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsthana 24/67
Sootrasthaana 1/127
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsasthana 24/86-87
Sootrasthaana 1/127
Sus`hruta Samhitaa Ed.
Vaidya Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint) 1998
V.B. Preetisudha, Etal, Bioactivity of Traditional
Preparation of Piper Lonum l.J Trop
Med. Plants Vol. 5 no.2 (Dec 2004)
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsasthana 1/3, 30
Pandeya G.S. and Chunekar k.C. Bhavprakash Nighantoo ed. 10, C.B.A. publication Varanasi page 47-48 verse 110
Sus`hruta Samhitaa Ed.
Vaidya Jadavaji Ta, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi (reprint) 1998 Uttara 65/4 commentary by Dalhana
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 29/7
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati
Prakshan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/23
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 29/9,
24 Vimana 8/3 Sushrutasamhita Ed. Vaidya
Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication
Varanasi (reprint) 1998 Sootrasthaana
1/22, 3/55
Mhetre H.B. Dwivedi R., application of Tantrayukti in Samhitadhyayanm Disseretation Dept of Maulika Siddhanta and Samhita,
IPGTRA, GAU, Jamnagr, Amrch 1998 page 23
Oxford English Dictionary 
Oxford English Dictionary
Sushrutasamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1998 Sootrasthaana 4/28
Sushrutasamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1998 Sootrasthaana 28/28
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 1/5-23
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsasthana 30/316-319
Vimaanasthaana 1/17-18
Charakasamhita Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 12
13/3 26/3-7
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sutrasthan 30/28-68
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8
/ 1-3
Mhetre H.b.Dwivedi R.B. application of Tantrayukti in Samhitadhyayanm Disseretation, dept. of Maulika Siddhanta and Samhita,
IPGTRA, GAU, Jamnagar, March 1998,
page 33 
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 30/16-19
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/. 3
Ashtanghrudaya Ed. Pandit Harishastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and
Krushnashastri Navre; Uttaratantra 40/78 commentary by Arunadatta
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/30-37
Charakasamhita Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 25-67
Dorland W.A Newman, Dorlands
illustrated medical dictionary Ed. 29th 2000
Sushrutsamhita W.A. Newman, Dorlands illustrated medical dictionary ed. 29th 2000
Sushrutsamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1998 Prasangat
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vi. 3/1 Chakrapani commentary 3/5
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 3/8
Ashtanghrudaya Ed. Pandit Harishastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and
Krushnashastri Navre; Sharirarsthana 3/85-103
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Indriyasthana 2/15, 3/7
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/81,
86, 87]
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 11/17
Ashtanghrudaya Ed. Pandit Harishastri, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1995 Ed. Anna Kunte and
Krushnashastri Navre; Sootrasthaana
1/22
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Charakasamhita Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 4/3-4
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Su. 25/39-40
Oxford dictionary and thesaurus
Kerlinger F.N.
Foundations of Behavioral Research ed. 3rd 1995
Martin graham a handbook of literary research, ed. Simon Etal the open university press 1998
Seal B., The positive sciences of the ancient Hindus Motilal Banarsidas Delhi reprint 1991
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vim 8/37
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 vi. 8/37
Bhargava D Anambhatts Tarkasamgra Motilal Banarsidas publishers
reprint 1992 Delhi
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 1/48
commentary
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 1/44-45
Sushrutsamhita Ed. Vaidya Jadavaji TA, Krushnadas academy publication Varanasi
(reprint) 1998 Sharirasthana 1/5-8
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi
Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati
Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Chikitsasthana
15/38-39
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 26/10
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 1/52 26/32-33
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sharirsthana 3/5-14
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 2000 Vimaanasthaana 8/70
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 11/17-32
Vimaanasthaana 3
/ 4,8/38-42
Charakasamhita Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Sootrasthaana 11/18-19
Vimaanasthaana 3
/4
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 Vimaanasthaana 8/38
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1999 vi. 8/41
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 2000 Vimansthan 8/42
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand
Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha
Surabharati Prakashan 6th edition 1998 Sutrasthan 1/10
Bhargava D Annambhatts Tarkasamfraha Motilal Banarasidas publishers reprint
1992 Delhi
Oxford dictionary Friedman L.M. Fundamentals of Clinical Trial
2nd ed. Massachusets 1985
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan 6th
edition 2000 Sootrasthaana 26/32 Bhargava
D Annambhatts Tarkasamgraha Motilal
Banarsidas publishers reprint 1992 Delhi page 68-70
Charaka Samhitaa Ed. Brahmanand Tripathi Vol 1, Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashan Varanasi (reprint)
 2000 Vimaanasthaana 1/3
Bhargava D Annambhatts Tarkasamgraha Motilal
Banarsidas publishers, reprint 1992 Delhi page 178-182

Dr. Asmita Wele
Department of Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana, 
BVDU College of Ayurved, Pune





