

Statistics in Ayurvedic Experimental Studies






Statistics in Ayurvedic
Experimental Studies

Dr. Mohan Kale


Abstract:-

The purpose of the
article is to highlight use of statistical techniques in Ayurvedic studies. It
emphasizes the need of statistics in such studies and helps to decide the exact
nature, type and time of a typical medical experimentation. In addition, the
information gathered through such experiments can be analyzed by various
statistical techniques. Further, the modeling of specific phenomena by the use
of Monte Carlo and / or statistical methods can be useful for the complete and
detailed study of a particular treatment. Due to the uncontrolled deforestation
for various purposes, raw material for the preparation of Ayurvedic drugs is
rarely available resulting in high cost of drugs and experimentation. In the
last part, the article discusses the need to build virtual laboratories so that
such type of studies can become cost effective in terms of money, time etc. 


1. Introduction

In recent years Ayurvedic treatments are getting their
share of preference by many people over the other types of treatments. The main
advantages of this treatment include the complete eradication of the disease
without any side effects of the drug taken and unlike the cosmetic relief
offered by other contemporary types of treatments, the Ayurvedic treatment give
a permanent solution to your disease. However, many objections are raised
against the Ayurvedic therapy (though some of them are found to be baseless)
such as long duration of the treatment, subjectivity of the treatment i.e. the
doses and drugs are specific varying from person to person, dietary
restrictions and use of some poisonous substances in the preparation of
Ayurvedic drugs. It is the consequence of these objections that the use of this
therapy has become a limited one and people are reluctant to take this
treatment and prefer the other types of treatments.

Hence, to nullify and answer these objections, one has to
do systematic studies and careful analysis of result has become absolutely necessary.
The statistical methods, being the scientifically proven methods, can be used
to fulfill this need of systematic analysis.

The present article is divided into five parts: The first part gives the introduction while
the need and choice of a specific type of experimentation in Ayurvedic studies
has been discussed in the second part. The third part is devoted to consider
how statistical tests are useful for analyzing the association between various
factors on the effectiveness of the treatment. The method for testing the
effectiveness of a newly developed drug/treatment is also indicated in this
section. The projections and model building of various situations by
statistical techniques has been discussed in the fourth part. The last part
indicates the use of computer and statistics to increase the effectiveness of
the studies.




2. Need and Scope of Statistics in
Ayurvedic Studies

The question, which many times asked, is when to conduct
experiments on animals (trials). The answer to this question is many folds, in
general; it is better to conduct experiments on animals when the effectiveness
of the treatment is under assessment. However, due to variety of practical
difficulties, it is not possible to conduct the experiment every now and then
and hence the above question can be reframed as when is it absolutely necessary
to conduct the experiment.

When one has sufficient earlier knowledge and / or
documented evidences about the effectiveness of the treatment giving clear nod
in favor of the treatment, then one can skip experimentation. But when a claim
is made about the better effectiveness of newly invented treatment for the cure
of some disease, or new combinations of some well known materials are to be
tried out, it becomes absolutely essential to conduct experiments on animals
and check whether one really gets the same results as been claimed. Also
according to various certifying agencies and bodies such as food and drugs
association (FDA), USA, accept the claim for newly developed medicine only when
it has been clinically proved. The clinical results obtained should be
statistically significant. Hence it has become mandatory for each treatment to
undergo a clinical trial and also if one wants to popularize his / her
treatment, it is better to follow these types of protocols.

Once it is decided to
conduct an experiment, a natural question which comes in is, how to experiment
and analyze the generated information to draw useful conclusions. Here
statistics play a very useful role in answering this query. It tells us how to
experiment in a systematic way and how to analyze the generated information so
as to draw conclusions. 

If the units on which the experiments are to be conducted
are homogeneous in nature, then the results obtained are clear and one can draw
conclusions very easily. However, in general, it is difficult to get
homogeneous unit in sufficient number and experimental units have variations
among them. Now, if after the administration of a particular treatment to such
non-homogeneous units, different responses will be obtained from them and one
may not be able to conclude whether it is due to the effect of the given
treatment or due to the variation present in these units. To draw point at
home, let us take an example: Suppose a group of n individuals suffering from
underweight problem is selected and enima (Basti) treatment is administered to
all of them. Further, let n1 of them show weight gain and n2 show no change (n=n1+n2). Then it is
difficult to conclude on the basis of this information only about the
effectiveness of the treatment. This is because an individual has its own
tendency to react and response to the treatment depending upon its bio-chemical
make up. If all of these individuals are having the same bio-chemical make up,
then surely n1>n2 implies effectiveness while n1<n2 tell the otherwise
story. Hence, if units are not homogeneous, more scientific methodology is
needed to analyze such situations.



Statistics fulfills this need with the technique called
Design of Experiments demonstrating how to experiment and how to analyze the
information. The technique is so powerful that one can make multiple comparison
of the effectiveness of various treatments simultaneously. The technique works
on its three basic principles 
1. Randomization 2.
Replications 3. Local control. Let us
explain this in more details in case of Ayurvedic study.

In Ayurveda, individuals are divided into three main
categories called Prakriti as Vata, Pitta and Kapha. Their combination is
also three i.e. the individual can be Vata-Kapha, Vata-Pitta etc. However, for
the simplicity of the discussion, only three types are considered here. Thus,
there is first source of variation namely the type of the individual and
depending upon the Prakriti, an individual may give a different response to the
same treatment. If this variation is not there and if all of them are of the
same type, then there could be other major basic factors, which influence the
effectiveness, say Agni. All of these may not be same on this characteristic.
Hence the first step is to single out various characters which are having
significant influence on the effectiveness of the treatment. These will act as
the source of variations. Now, depending upon the number of the source of variations,
one may use any of the following designs:

Completely
randomized design (CRD) : only variation due to treatment is the source
variation.
Randomized
block design (RBD): Two sources of variation, one due to treatment + one
additional due to the non-homogeneity of the experimental units.
Latin
Square design (LSD) : Three sources of variation, one due to treatment + two
additional due to non-homogeneity
Balanced
incomplete block design factorial experiments etc.

Consider the randomized block design with two sources of
variations as indicated. The problem is to test whether all the treatments have
the same effectiveness for the cure of underlying disease. Three principle of
design can be applied as follows:

Suppose there are n experimental units / individuals
having the following break up 

Vaata Prakriti + Kapha Prakriti + Pitta Prakriti = Total

N1  N2  N3  N

Then all the individuals of the same Prakriti are grouped
in to one group called block and each treatment is administered in each block.
Which treatment is given to which individual is decided purely by random
mechanism such as lottery methods by giving no preference to any one. Hence
each treatment has replications equal to number of blocks. Then the data
collected can be analyzed using F-test to conclude whether the effectiveness of
the treatments is same or they differ. Similarly, working of the other designs
can be discussed. 

Further, it may be possible that there is interaction
effect of the two treatments i.e. more natural and more realistic e.g. It is
well known that Tulsi, Jesthamadh and Souph are recommended in the treatment
for cough and cold. However what one observes is that the drugs, which are
prescribed, are the combinations of these in aqueous state or they are in the
form of chewable tables. This is because their interaction has more
effectiveness than individuals as far as curing ability is concerned. If one is
also interested in testing whether there is significant effect of interaction,
then one has to work with what are known as Factorial Experiments. Another
example is of a liquid drug called Bhallatakasava which is prepared from
Bhallataka, Haritaki, Amalaki, Guduchi and Loha Bhasma taken in appropriate
proportion. Now each one of them has its effectiveness for the deficiency or
trouble, however, Asava prepared with these individual ingredients taking
together has wonderful results and is handy to use than these individuals and
is frequency used in Ayurveda. Similarly once can take the examples of
Kumariasava, Drakshasava and others.

The examples discussed above are not new and everyone
practicing in Ayurveda is already known their effectiveness. However, to draw
the points, these examples are used so that the subject matter can be
understood in a better way.

Another possible use of Statistics is to quantity the data
generated. After a fair amount of period from starting a Ayurvedic treatment
one wants to know whether the treatment is going in a right direction or not.
The only way to know this is to undergo suitable Pathological tests, however,
many times these tests give results which are qualitative in nature i.e.
positive or negative ness of the test and not recorded quantitatively. For the
analysis of effectiveness, it is absolutely necessary to quantify the data and condense
and present it in proper form. This can be illustrated with a following
example:

Consider a case of an individual under Ayurvedic treatment
for the heart-related problem. After a sufficient time interval he/she
undergoes a stress test and detected positive, then if the data are not
quantitative, then one may think that the treatment is not useful. But if it is
recorded that an individual has positive stress test for a comfortable walk of
say 8 seconds before the treatment and after the treatment he/she has a stress
test positive with a comfortable walking timing of 5 minutes, then one can
immediately in which way the treatment is going. It may happen that after the
second time, the test would be continued to be positive but with the
comfortable walking timing of 8 minutes. Then this result sure indicates the
effectiveness of the treatment. If this study is carried out for a group of
individuals undergoing such treatment, then based on this data one can say
something about the effectiveness of the treatment, in general. Same can be
said about the lipid profile test and other tests for different diseases.

Lastly let us look at another problem, which has more
chance of occurring in Ayurvedic studies called missing observation. This can
be described as follows:

Suppose n individuals / units are selected for an
experiment, which involves the study of the comparison of various treatments.
The experiments are to be conducted for a specific duration. Now suppose due to
negative canvassing or any other reasons, some individuals stop coming for the
treatment and you have generated incomplete data with some missing
observations. What one can do in such situation? Does all the efforts are in
vain? Are we going to start a fresh? The answer is no. You do not have to do
this once again. Statistics is at your help. The technique called the Missing
Plot technique can help you to estimate these observations based on the data
you have collected with a desirable accuracy. Using these estimated values at
the place of missing observations, you can analyze the data and draw accurate
conclusions. 

3. Use of some Statistical Tests:

Many times in Ayurvedic studies one has to detect
association between various factors to answer the questions, which are of the
following types:
Does the effectiveness of the treatment depend upon the
age?
Do the stage of the disease in which an individual is has
any influence on the effectiveness of the drug?
Do I have to follow a strict vegetarian diet while
undergoing an Ayurvedic treatment?
A typical set of complaints, are they indicator of the
possibility of a specific type of disease uniquely? Or in other words, do I
become susceptible to a particular type of a disease?
Do my typical type of life style make me more susceptible
to a particular type of a disease? Etc.

To answer above types of questions, one has to undertake
the study in which responses could be of the qualitative nature. The response
of an individual could be any one of the following: 

treatment
     is completely useful
treatment
     is partially useful
treatment
     is marginally useful
treatment
     is ineffective


now in this particular study, one has to analyze
qualitative characteristics (attributes). To answer all above questions, it is
recommended to use a technique for the analysis of two attributes, namely
chi-square (2) test for the association of attributes. E.g. let us look at the
question (a) Here the first attribute would be A: Age of an individual and the
second, B: Response to the treatment. The attribute A can have four levels say
Child, Young, Middle aged and old aged (defined by taking appropriate age
group) also attribute has four levels labeled by appropriate names. Then, the
data can be summarized in the form of a 4 (4 table called as 4 ( 4 contingency
table, Then, one can use chi-square test of association of two attributes in 4
( 4 contingency table to conclude about the association).

Similarly if one want to see whether there is any
association between the dietary habits and effectiveness of the treatment, then
attribute A has three levels: Vegetarian, non-vegetarian and mixed diet and the
attribute b has four levels as earlier, then the data generated can be
summarized in to 3 (4 contingency table and chi-square test for the association
of attributes in 3 (4 contingency table can be use to analyze the data and
conclusions can be drawn.

Another situation wherein has to make use of a statistical
test is when the effectiveness of one single treatment is to be assessed. The
experiment can be conducted as follows: A group of n individuals / objects
suffering from a particular disease is selected and the status of their health
before the treatment and after a sufficient time interval of a particular given
treatment is noted generating the data in the variable form. Let the health
status before and after the treatment be denoted by X and Y respectively, then
the data generated would be (Xi Yi), I = 1,2, ---- n wherein Xi = health status
of ith individual before the treatment and Yi = Health status of ith individual
after the treatment. 

Evaluate di = Xi  Yi = I = 1,2--- n. Based on these di
values one can use pair t-test to analyze the data and conclude about the
effectiveness of the treatment.

Illustration: Suppose Basti treatment is recommended for
gain in weight. A group of m individuals having underweight problem is
selected. Let the weight before the treatment of each of these individuals be
recorded as X1 ----- Xn. Basti is administered to all of them and then after a
sufficient time interval, let the weight after the treatment for each of these
individual be Y1 --- Yn. Then di = Xi  Yi, I= 1,2  n, then using these values
and pair t-tst, one can conclude whether Basti is effective for increasing the
weight.

There could be a situation when one only wants to compare
the effectiveness of two different treatments. There could be a situation in
which it is required to test whether the Ayurvedic treatment is equally
effective as compared to the other contemporary pathies for curing a typical
type of a disorder. This is needed because many a times, false negative
canvassing is done against Ayurveda by saying that our brand of treatment is
better than Ayurveda and Ayurvedic treatment cant match our brand in power of
curing the disorder. To answer this criticism, it is recommended to use what is
called as two-sample t-test. The experimentation will be done as follows:
Suppose we want to compare two brands, say A and B, a: Ayurvedic and B: Other
brand. Administer treatment A to a group of n1 individuals and treatment B to a
group of n2 individuals. N1 may or may not be equal to n2. Then using the data,
calculate averages and dispersion for each of the two groups and using these
and the mechanism of two-sample t-test one can conclude about the equality in
effectiveness of the two treatments. 

Similarly there are other Statistical tests, which can be
used in Ayurvedic studies as and when required.


Projections and Modeling


It is many times thought that various substances used in
Ayurveda to prepare  Bhasma are poisonous and hence it is harmful to take
such treatment. This has again turned out to be a baseless allegation against
Ayurveda. However, one has disapprove this claim by using scientific methods.
The typical examples are those of Mercury and Sulfur used in the preparation of
Ayurvedic drugs curing various disorders. The experiment can be conducted as
follows: Give different concentrations of such doses to the animals under
observation and record their health status. It is well known that a specific
type of enzyme secretion takes place in liver to encounter any poisonous
element entering the body. Now, it is good to record the concentration of this
enzyme secreted and its ability to nullify the poisonous effect. Now to know
about the concentration of the above-mentioned drug that can be tolerated by
the animal under study, is to keep on increasing the drug concentration till
the animal dies and the dose at which an animal dies is the Threshold of
tolerance. If this threshold is much higher than the amount of the element in
the Ayurvedic drug, then the allegation is baseless. However, statistics
provides a technique in which one can obtain this threshold without killing the
animal. The procedure is as follows: Give various concentrations of doses to
animals which are not too high and record the health status of the animal,
denoted by X: Concentration of the dose and Y: Health status. Collect
observations ( Xi, Yi), I = 1,2 --- n on each of the n animals. Then using a
technique called method of least squares, one can obtain model Y=f(x) i.e. Y is
a function of x. Then one can substitute various values of X which are much
higher and see what are the corresponding values of Y. Also the function can be
plotted and using graphical procedure, one can obtain the threshold dose. Thus,
it saves the animal (experimental unit) and allegation can be disproved as
earlier by comparing two values. This exercise is nothing but modeling the
phenomenon under consideration and projecting Y values for given values of X.

Second example wherein the projection and Modeling can be
useful is that of deciding optimum dose of a treatment to cure a certain
disorder. Let us explain this with an example: Again the illustration is taken
to deliver a message rather than generating anything new. However, same
experiment can be conducted for a new drug and conclusions can be drawn.
Suppose an optimum dose for the treatment on diabetic disorder is to be
decided. Further, let us assume that a new drug Madhumeharai is being
designed to control this disorder and the optimum dose of this drug is to be
found out. Now for various diabetic patients different intensity doses are
being tried and data are recorded. 

X= Intensity of dose to bring down the blood sugar to a
controlled range (non-diabetic zone) and Y = Initial blood sugar content.

Then, using the method of least square technique, one can
construct a model, X=g (Y), and for the given value of Y one can get the
optimum value of the intensity of the dose. 

Lastly, give a mechanism to answer the question, how long
should I continue my treatment for specific type disorder? Here also one can
use the technique discussed earlier to obtain optimum duration for the cure.
The variable here are: X = Initial state of the patient and Y = Duration of the
treatment required for the cure.


Use
     of virtual laboratory in Ayurvedic Experiments


With the arrival of an information technology generation,
it has become more simpler and less time consuming to make experiments. What
one can do is to conduct a sort of pilot experiment on handful of objects for a
manageable time span. Then supply this information to computer in the form of
suitable database and then keep on simulated observation give you the output as
if you have conducted the experiments under given conditions with desired
accuracy. In this exercise, lot of money, energy and time is saved and once can
generate as many observations as one ants. Thee are not the true observations
but the simulated ones. Hence the experiments involving simulations are called
virtual experiments and the system is the virtual laboratory. This type of
technique is very useful in conducting the trials on newly invented drugs. One
can generate real data by using low intensity doses on animals and then by
simulating, picture can be projected about the situations when higher dose is
administered.

The discussion in earlier section about modeling and
projection can be done very easily using computer and once a model is
established it is easy to simulate the observation using this model. Hence, statistical
techniques play a crucial role in constructing virtual laboratories.

In the Ayurvedic experimental studies also one can prepare
a data bank of various Ayurvedic treatments which are available for various
disorders and prepare a expert system to guide the treatment for a particular
disorder and the effect of which can be tested using techniques mentioned
above.

In all above discussion an attempt has been made to
discuss the philosophy and logic behind various statistical techniques and
their possible use in Ayurvedic experiments. The other details like formulae
are avoided to make the discussion simpler and moreover, these can be obtained
from various resources in the literature. 







