

Chikitsaa Prakaara: Basti



Chikitsaa Prakaara: Basti

Prakaara Paribhaashaa
 A. H. Su. 19 / 1
The procedure in
which medicine is administered inside the rectum with the help of bladder of
any animal is termed as Basti.

Description:Kaala/Vaya/Ahoraatra/Ritu/Bhukta
The time of
administration should be decided according to the type of Basti.

Poorvakarma (Prerequisites):
This should be done
according to the type of Basti.

Classification of Basti:
Based on the site of
administration of Basti:
Pakvaas`hayagata Basti - The Basti is
administered through anal orifice.
Garbhaas`hayagata Basti - The Basti is
administered through vaginal orifice. This is also called as Uttara Basti.
Mootraas`hayagata Basti - The Basti is
administered through urethral orifice. This is also called as Uttara Basti.
Vran`agata Basti - The Basti is
administered through wound opening to achieve Vran`a Ropan`a or Vran`a
S`hodhana.
Based on the type of
drug used to prepare the Basti medicine:
Nirooha Basti - The active ingredient of Nirooha
Basti is decoction.
Anuvaasana Basti - The active ingredient of Anuvaasana Basti is any unctuous drug like Taila.
Based on the effect
of Basti:
S`hodhana Basti ñ The effect of this type of Basti is mainly elimination of Dosha
and Mala. This is again divided
into two types i.e. Teekshn`a Basti and
Mridu Basti based on the drugs used
for Basti. 
Lekhana Basti - The effect of this type of Basti
is Lekhana. The Basti mainly affects Meda Dhaatu.
Snehana Basti ñ This Basti mainly comprises
of Sneha Dravya.
Utkles`hana Basti ñ This Basti does
Utkles`ha (precipitation) of Dosha and Mala. Thus there is aggravation and liquefaction of Dosha.
Doshahara Basti ñ This is a S`hodhana
type of Basti.
S`hamana Basti ñ Pacifying Basti
Brimhan`a Basti ñ This Basti acts
as Brimhan`a i.e. it is indicated in Kaars`hya.
Karshan`a Basti ñ This Basti acts
as Karshan`a i.e. it is indicated in Sthaulya.
Rasaayana Basti ñ This Basti acts
as Rasaayana.
Vaajeekaran`a Basti ñ This Basti acts
as Vaajeekaran`a.
Snehaneeya Basti - This Basti acts
as Snehaneeya.
Chakshushaya ñ This Basti is helpful in
improving health of eye.
Samgraahee Basti ñ This Basti acts
as Pureesha Samgrahan`eeya.
Varn`aprasaadana Basti ñ This Basti acts
as Varn`ya.
Based on the number of
Basti to be administered
consecutively as a course:
Karma Basti ñ This Basti course comprises
of 30 Basti in total. The course should be started with Anuvaasana Basti. Then alternately 12 Aasthaapana and 12 Anuvaasana Basti should be administered. Then 5 Anuvaasana Basti should be administered
at the end.
Kaala Basti ñ This Basti course comprises
of 16 Basti in total. The
course should be started with Anuvaasana
Basti. Then alternately 6 Aasthaapana
and 6 Anuvaasana Basti should be
administered. Then 3 Anuvaasana Basti should
be administered at the end.
Yoga Basti ñ This Basti course comprises
of 16 Basti in total. The course should be started with Anuvaasana Basti. Then alternately 3 Aasthaapana and 3 Anuvaasana Basti should be administered. Then 1 Anuvaasana Basti should be administered
at the end.
In classical texts
some more types of Basti are
mentioned with specific names. These are as follows:
Yaapana Basti ñ This Basti can be
administered at any time. Yaapana (prolonging)
of life can be achieved by administration of this Basti. 
Siddha Basti ñ The Basti which cure a
certain disease are called as Siddha
Basti.
Prasrita Yaugiki Basti ñThe Basti which
should be administered in the dose of one Prasrita
is called as Prasrita Yaugiki Basti.
Dvaadas`ha Prasritikee Basti - The Basti which
should be administered in the dose of twelve Prasrita is called as Prasrita
Yaugiki Basti.
Paadaheena Basti - The Basti which
should be administered in the dose of nine Prasrita
is called as Prasrita Yaugiki Basti.
Teekshn`a Basti ñ The Basti which
contains Teekshn`a (penetrating) Dravya such as Kshaara, Mootra or other drugs having Ushn`a property. If the basti
doesnít come out within indicated time then this type of Basti should be administered.
Mridu Basti ñ The Basti which contains Mridu (mild) Dravya such as Dugdha,
Maamsarasa, Ghrita, etc.
Pichchhaa Basti ñ The Basti which
contains drugs having Pichchhila (slimy)
property is called asPichchhaa Basti. By
administration of such type of Basti the
flow of blood or flow of Pichchhaa out
of body can be stopped. This has Samgraahee
effect also.
Rakta Basti ñ Administration of blood of animals like goat is called as Rakta Basti. This type of Basti should be administered to
compensate the Raktakshaya due to any
cause.

Other Description:
Pichchhaa
Basti should be administered in Atisaara
associated with Alpaalpa Bahu
Raktasraava, S`hoola and Vibaddha Vaayu.
Pichchhaa
Basti should be administered in Atisaara
associated with Apras`haamyanti Rujaa.
Pichchhaa
Basti should be administered in Pravaahikaa
if there is no Vyaadhi Upas`haya
due to Langhana and Paachana Chikitsaa.
Pichchhaa
Basti should be administered in Pittaja
Atisaara if there is no Upas`haya due to all other measures.
Pichchhaa
Basti should not be administered in Atisaara associated with Vibaddha Vaata, Vibaddha Varcha, Bahu S`hoola Pravaahikaa, Sarakta
Pichchha and having Trishn`aa.
Yaapana Basti should be
administered in Vishama Jvara,
Punaraavartaka Jvara, Pittaavrita Vaata.
Yaapana Basti should be administered in Haleemaka
associated with Virikta Rugn`a.




