

Chikitsaa Prakaara: Netra Tarpan`a



Chikitsaa Prakaara: Netra
Tarpan`a

Prakaara Paribhashaa: 
Tarpan`a:
Triptijanakam (Nourishing / Rehydrating); Akshi / Netra: Eye 
The procedure which imparts Tripti (Nourishment) to eye is called Akshitarpan`a.
 D`alhan`a 
This is a
procedure in which medicated or plain unctuous substances like Ghrita are retained over the eyeball for
a prescribed period of time as either preventive or curative treatment
modality. It is aimed at providing nourishment and improving the efficiency of
the eyes. 

Description: Kaala/Vaya/Ahoraatra/Ritu/Bhukta
Akshitarpan`a is normally administered at the time of Poorvaahn`a (pre noon). 
Aparaanhn`a (afternoon) of the day 
Akshitarpan`a is given both at the morning and evening. 
Akshitarpan`a is given at Sadhaaran`a
Kaala (moderate, temperate season) of the year.


Poorvakarma: (Prerequisites):
The patient should under go S`hodhana
(Vamana Virechana Raktamokshan`a, Nirooha
Basti) and S`hiro Virechana Nasya
(Errhines) this leads to elimination of the vitiated three Dosha. A cleaner internal environment and improved sensorimotor
apparatus function which is called as Mastishka
S`hodhana should be achieved. 
The patient should be examined by the Vaidya
with respect to digestion status of previous day. This gives information about
the Agni status of the person.
The room
where Netra Tarpan`a is to be administered should be closed, devoid of direct
breeze, sunlight, smoke, and should be furnished with curtains of colours
except blue and yellow.. 
Selection
of auspicious and suitable time for
the patient. 
Instrument Checklist: 
Flour of Maasha (Phaseolus mungo) / Yava (Hordeum vulgare),
Water, Utensil for mixing the flour, eyelid cover, sunglasses, hot water
bath, cotton, cloth. 
Patient Preparation:
Pre procedural counselling should be done to maintain good psychological
health and to explain the procedure, its effects. 
The patient should lie down in supine and face upward position without a
pillow or head rest on a levelled bed. 
Medicine Preparation: 
The flour
of the Maasha / Yava should be thoroughly mixed and made into thick paste, 
Unctuous material Sneha
(Ghritaman`d`a supernatant part of
ghee that does not set or congeal/ Ghrita
/ medicated milk, Vasaa it is the
unctuous part of meat that separates on cooking). 

Pradhaanakarma:
The thick
homogenous paste of black gram or barley flour should be rolled into a cylinder(tube
like) of about one inch thickness and should be gently placed around the eye,
the joint between the skin and the paste should be sealed using wet finger and
pressing it to the skin, the height should be about two finger breadth.
Precaution should be taken that it should not leak and should be tolerable to
the patient. As a precaution a packing of cotton can be packed on the outside
to prevent possible leakage of the ghee.
The
unctuous material should be made lukewarm in a hot water bath. The temperature
should be tested by dipping little finger in it; ghee should be of just body
temperature as eyes are generally contraindicated for sudation.
The eyes
of patient should be closed.
The lukewarm unctuous (Ghritaman`d`a
/ medicated ghee/ milk) material should be poured inside the
flour wall made around the eyelid slowly. The physician should keep his left
index finger just above the eye lashes and then pour the warm ghee on the
closed eyes till the lashes are immersed.
The quantity of Sneha should be
just above the level the tip of eyelashes.
After pouring the ghee the finger should be removed and the patient should be asked to blink eye slowly and repeatedly, he should be asked to perform
eye movements slowly through out the session up to adequate Tripti Lakshan`a.

 Tarpan`a
: 
Type,Period,Unnamed: 2
Nyoonadosha / Vaata Dosha,1day,Everyday
Madhyama Dosha /Pitta Dosha,3 day,Alternate  day
Prabala Dosha / Kapha Dosha,5 days,After  interval of 3 days
Sannipaatika Dosha,,After  interval of 2days
Svastha Netra,,After  interval of 2days






Disease of eye parts / Dosha,Time,Period
Sandhi Gata,300  Maatraa,
Vartma Gata,100  Maatraa,
S`hukla Gata,500  Maatraa,
Krishn`a Gata,700  Maatraa,
Drisht`i Gata,1000 / 800 Maatraa,
Vaata,100  Maatraa,Daily
Pitta,600  Maatraa,Alternate  days
Svastha Netra,600 /  500 ref.,2 days  alternate
Kapha,500 Maatraa,2 days  alternate



Pas`hchaatkarma: 
The Ghee should be retained for
prescribed length of time or till the symptoms of adequacy become apparent, it
should be then drained by puncturing the flour wall laterally and the flowing
ghee should be collected in a vessel. The flour should be gently removed from
the skin, using the residual Ghee to
moisten it. 
The eye should be cleaned with a soft moist warm cloth. He should be
asked to get up and relax for a while. 
The patient should be given the medicated smoking Dhoomapaana.
The patient should not be allowed to face direct bright light immediately
after Tarpan`a.
The patient should not be allowed to see bright objects and sky
immediately after Tarpan`a.
The patient should follow the dietary and lifestyle regime double the
period with respect to Tarpan`a Kaala. 
The patient should keep the flowers of jasmine over the eyes for cooling
effect. 
After Tarpan`a the eyesight
gets Klaanta therefore Put`apaka is advised .Due to prolonged
retention e.g. volume of ghee and continuous movements of eyes with the volume
of ghee in them they are exhausted hence to relieve their fatigue and to
restore them to normality Put`apaka. 


Other
Description:
Tarpan`a should not be
advised when climate is too cloudy, hot, and cold and when the patient is
suffering from redness and excessive pain in the eye. 
Tarpan`a of Vasaa (muscular fat /
lard) is indicated in Timira, Naktaandhya (night blindness), (Krichhrabodha) Krichhronmeelana (difficulty in opening the eyes), ptosis 
Tarpan`a is effective
on the Netra Budbud. 
Tarpan`a should be
administered using Vaata alleviating
drugs in Dvi Tvaggata Savran`a S`hukra associated
with S`hoola.
Various
formulations used can be got through Anveshak
search facility.





