

Samsarjana krama:



Samsarjana
Krama

Introduction: This is special type of food regime used after Panchakarma specifically after Vamana & Virechana. After Panchakarma, the Agni is diminished for certain period. It is incapable of digesting
normal food. At this stage, particular sequence in relation to the food regime i.e.
Samsarjana Krama is advised. It
consists of Mand`a, Peyaa, Vilepee and Yoosha in order. They are comparatively heavy to digest in
descending order. During S`hodhana a
lots of fluid is lost leading to diminished function of Agni which is to be gradually improved; this sequential management
is called as Samsarjana Krama. Samsarjana Krama is set up according to
gradation of S`hodhana. Gradation
of S`hodhana is of three types Pradhaana, Madhyama and Avara. Samsarjana Krama is sequentially arranged as Peyaa, Vilepee, Akrita Yoosha, Krita Yoosha, Akrita Maamsa Rasa, Krita
Maamsa Rasa.

Type of  S`huddhi,Pradhaana  S`huddhi,Madhayama  S`huddhi,Avara S`huddhi
Period of Anna  Kaala,3,2,1
Days,7,5,3


Chart for the Samsarjana
Krama:

Day,Time,Pradhaana  S`huddhi,Madhayama  S`huddhi,Avara S`huddhi
1,Praath,-,-,-
1,Saayam,Peyaa,Peyaa,Peyaa
2,Praath,Peyaa,Peyaa,Vilepee
2,Saayam,Peyaa,Vilepee,Kritaakrita Yoosha
3,Praath,Vilepee,Vilepee,Kritaakrita Maamsa Rasa
3,Saayam,Vilepee,Akrita Yoosha,Saamanya Bhojana
4,Praath,Vilepee,Krita Yoosha,-
4,Saayam,Akrita Yoosha,Akrita Maamsa Rasa,-
5,Praath,Krita Yoosha,Krita Maamsa Rasa,-
5,Saayam,Krita Yoosha,Saamanya Bhojana,-
6,Praath,Akrita Maamsa Rasa,-,-
6,Saayam,Krita Maamsa Rasa,-,-
7,Praath,Krita Maamsa Rasa,-,-
7,Saayam,Saamanya Bhojana,-,-


Man`d`a- It is prepared from grains (mainly rice) which are cooked with
water in proportion of 1: 14 and the scum of this preparation is collected.

Peyaa (Liquid Gruel)-It is prepared from grains (mainly rice) which is cooked in either
fourteen times or four times of water. It contains more of fluid and less of
grains and is able to sip. 

Vilepee- Vilepee consists of major part of boiled grains. It is
prepared from various type grains like sesame, green gram, black gram and
mainly rice which are cooked in four times of water till it becomes
substantially thick paste like and semisolid .Vilepee prepared from meat, vegetables, fruits also have similar
properties, how ever when prepared in sour medium it becomes heavy to digest. 

Yoosha- It is
prepared from grains (mainly cereals) cooked in fourteen times of water
until it becomes sufficiently thick. Cereals cooked with eighteen times of
water like decoction which is slightly thick but the patient is able to sip, is
also termed as Yoosha (B.P.N.)
It
is classified into two subtypes:
Krita Yoosha: It is called as Samskaarita Yoosha as it is processed in ghee / oil with addition
of salt, pungent items like ginger, black piper sour fruits and Dhaanyaamla. It is Gurutara (comparatively heavier), pacifies Vaata and is more palatable. 
Akrita Yoosha: Akrita Yoosha is preparation of only grains (cereals) and water in
prescribed amount and it is devoid of any additions of spice / pungent spices. 
Maamsa Rasa-It is consumed as a single dietary article. Also used as a medium to
prepare Yoosha, Yavaagoo and other foods. Maamsa
Rasa means a meat soup prepared by boiling the chopped boneless meat with
twelve times of water and cooked until six parts of water remains. Maamsa Rasa can also be prepared as per
standard Yoosha preparation. There
are two types of Maamsa Rasa:
Akrita Maamsa
Rasa: Plain meat
soup, prepared without adding any spices, ghee, oil etc.
Krita Maamsa
Rasa: Meat soup
prepared by adding salt, ginger and other spices and seasoned with mustard and
cumin seeds in ghee or oil. 




