

AayurVidnyaana




AayurVidnyaana Kosha 

AayurVidnyaana Kosha is encyclopedia of Ayurveda.

The AayurVidnyaana
Kosha window is divided into two frames. The left frame has three tabs,
Contents, Search and New Window. Right frame is for viewing the document.

About AayurVidnyaana Kosha

AyuSoft encyclopedia elaborates scientific basis,
theory and strength of Ayurveda in a dynamic form. 
Key topic of different subjects highlighted with
their clinical applications. 
This includes information regarding Ayurvedic
concepts, current status of Ayurveda and related research articles. 
The Encyclopedia of AyuSoft includes articles from
eminent people related with the field of Ayurveda. 
The Articles are focused and classified according
to the respective subjects to cover all the branches of Ayurveda. 
AyuSoft Encyclopedia provides elaboration of
various topics required for decision support. 
These are made available in form of guidelines for
patient assessment, Panchakarma And allied Karma, pathogenesis
and theory of disease. 
The
AyuSoft Ayurvedic data is captured
from the texts which are Charaka
Samhitaa, Sus`hruta Samhitaa, Asht`aanga Hridaya and Maadhava Nidaana. These texts are the prime and authentic texts for
the uniform and genuine information. 
The
history of the texts is captured and explained under the title of Introduction
to Samhitaa 
The
Encyclopedia explains the basic principles of Ayurvedic science, which supports the knowledge for the root of
diagnosis, structure and functional concepts behind the theory of ancient
fundamental principles. 
AyuSoft
Encyclopedia has authentic collection of photographs, clips of Panchakarma and allied therapies (Chikitsaa Karma) / examination and
treatments, audio files of oblations and guidelines wherever and whenever
required. 
Encyclopedia
of AyuSoft is also aware of the ever-growing research in the field of Ayurveda, thus, to keep the user updated
with today’s world AyuSoft provides some of the important links of registered
sites and associations of Ayurveda. 

Contents

Selecting
this option will help in navigating through AayurVidnyaana Kosha
contents. 
Click
on the book to view its content and on clicking the page; detailed contents of
the particular topic will be displayed. If selected topic is a video clip, it
will be opened using windows media player, click on Play button to watch the
clip. Click New Window option to view the selected topic in maximized screen. 
If
it is a multimedia gallery, all the pictures under the selected topic will be
loaded in right frame. Click on the link below the picture, to view the
magnified picture and its details if any.

Ayurveda Samhitaa:
- This part contains digitalized copy of Charaka
Samhitaa, Sus`hruta Samhitaa
& Asht`aanga Hridaya. 

Articles: - This part contains articles
highlighting various aspects of Ayurveda.


Multimedia gallery: - It comprises of photographs of
Herbs, Instruments, and Diseases etc. 

Chikitsaa Karma clips: - It comprises video clips of Chikitsaa Karma like Vamana, Raktamokshan`a etc. with narration. 


Search

Facility
to search in Ayurveda Samhitaa, Multimedia gallery, AyuSoft
database, Chikitsaa Karma & Articles is provided.
Selecting
this option makes possible for you to limit search to the specific category of
the current topicin two languages either English or Sanskrit.
To
change the scope of search for English language, select one of thefilters
from the following list.

Encyclopedia
Procedures
Multimedia


Type the word in the Search
     textbox or you can use a keyboard for typing in the Search textbox
     (depending upon the selected language), which will appear on click of Sanskrit
     button placed on left side of main frame if the focus is on the same
     textbox and Caps Lock of your keyboard is on. To begin search click on GO
     button or press Enter. 
To enable full text search,
     check the checkbox beside the Search Textbox.
Related links where the word
     entered is present will be displayed in left frame, click on the required
     link to view the related article in right frame with the highlighted word
     entered for searching.


e.g. 
If
you select word Chhardi (in English)
in Articles then it will show where that word appeared in Articles. 

If
you select word Vamana (in English)
in Chikitsaa Karma then it will show video clip of Vamana Chikitsaa Karma. 

If
you select word Vamana (in English)
in AyuSoft database then it will show all treatment related information of Vamana from AyuSoft database. 

If
you select word Chhardi (in Sanskrit) in Ayurveda Samhitaa then it
will show where that word appeared in Ayurveda
Samhitaa. 

If
you select word S`hataavaree (in
English) in Multimedia Gallery then it will show image of S`hataavaree. 


Ayurveda Samhitaa 

Charaka Samhitaa,
Sus`hruta Samhitaa and Asht`aanga Hridaya
are available in digitalized form.
Digitalized
Texts have the facility for instant reference and search for particular word or
character from Charaka Samhitaa,
Sus`hruta Samhitaa and Asht`aanga
Hridaya. 

Structure of Ayurveda Samhitaa : -

Name of Samhitaa : Sthaana of Samhitaa :
Name of Adhyaaya
Charaka
Samhitaa­­à Chikitsaa Sthaana à
03. Jvara Chikitsaa à Sootra.

The digitalized texts include only Sootra
.
Each Samhitaa is
entitled with index and the name of the chapter in Content section.

Each Sthaana (section) has
been separated for easy search.

Each chapter is a sub-section of Sthaana where Sthaana is
a subsection of the Samhitaa.
Therefore to Search for the reference of C.Chi.3/37. The user should first
click on Charaka Samhitaa then on Chikitsaa Sthaana then on Jvara Chikitsaa (3rd chapter)
and then look for the Sootra 37 in
the Samhitaa getting displayed at the
right side.


S.N,Samhitaa,Edition,Publication,Title and Edited by
1,Charaka,Fifth  Edition - 2001,"Chaukhambaa  Sanskrit Samsthaana, Varanasi",Charaka  Samhitaa - Vaidya. Jadhavji Trikamji Acharya
2,Sus`hruta,Seventh  Edition - 2002,"Chaukhambaa  Orientaliya, Varanasi",Sus`hruta Samhitaa – Vaidya. Jadhavji Trikamji  Acharya and Narayan Ram Acharya.
3,Asht`aanga Hridaya,Ninth  Edition- 2002,"Chaukhambaa  Orientaliya, Varanasi",Asht`aanga Hridaya – Bhishagacharya Harishashtri  Paradkar Vaidya.


Using this application user can do fast compilation.
E.g. If user search for word 
Then
it will display: 

Name of Samhitaa : Sthaana of Samhitaa :
Name of Adhyaaya : Highlighted word


Articles


In
AyuSoft database, interactive data is captured. But if user wants elaborative
description then this section is very useful. In this section there are
articles by stalwarts of Ayurveda
highlighting various conceptual, theoretical & practical aspects of Ayurveda. 
These
articles are divided under various categories:- 

Basic
     Principles 
Nidaana 
Dravya Gun`a, Rasas`haashtra and Bhaishajya Kalpanaa 
Stree Roga and
     Prasooti Tantra and
Baalaroga
Kaayachikitsaa and Panchakarma 
Rasaayana and
     Vaajikaran`a 
S`halya and S`haalaakya 
Research
and other


User can search particular word in articles. 

Multimedia
gallery-

The gallery includes images related to Anatomy, Physiology, images
of herbs, clinical pictures of diseases & images of therapeutic procedures
etc.
Images of plants, animals and other medicines included in Ayurveda E.g. – S`hataavaree (Asparagus
racemosus) and S`hilaajatu (Black bitumen). 
Images of clinical signs and symptoms mentioned for the disease.
Images showing actual procedures and instruments useful for
operating the procedure. 

User can search particular image in Multimedia gallery.


Chikitsaa Karma –

In this
part you can view video clips of some clinical procedures with narration. These
procedures provide idea about basic Karma.
You can get detail information about that procedure through textual file of
that Chikitsaa Karma described under
the article section under Kaayachikitsaa category.


You can search particular clip in Chikitsaa
Karma. 

Note: For some words while searching it might show some
extra topics in which the searced text will not be found. This will happen for
Sanskrit word search where the word to be searched will become a different
word, if converted to lowercase. This happens since the search mechanism
converts all the words in lowercase before search process. It might also happen
that some words searched in English might show that word is not found or might
show some extra topic since words such as “beginning” will be search as
“beginn” i.e it will removed stems (ing, ed, s, etc.) from the words before
searching.

Transliteration Rules used in AyuSoft

Spellings:

a  aa i ee u oo e ai o au am ah

ka kha ga gha 

cha chha ja jha

t`a t`ha d`a d`ha n`a

ta tha da dha na

pa pha ba bha ma

ya ra la va s`ha sha sa ha l`a ksha dnya


Abbreviations:
Ashtanghridaya :- A.H.
Charaka Samhita :- C.
Sushruta Samhita :- S.
Sootra Sthaana :- Su.
Kalpa Sthaana :-
K.
Shaareera Sthaana :- Sha.
Nidaana Sthaana :- Ni.
Chikitaa Sthaana :- Chi.
Siddhi Sthaana :- Si.
Uttara Tantra :-
U.
Vimana Sthana:- V
Indriya Sthana:-
In





