

Vaccination





Vaccination

Vaccination changes from nation to
nation, but the principle behind the immunisation remains the same. The immune
system defends the individual from infections with microbes such as bacteria,
viruses, fungi and protozoa. Immune system also impedes the development of
autoimmune and malignant diseases. There are 4 essential parts of protective
immune system of the body namely humoral or antibody related immunity,
cell-mediated immunity, phagocytosis, and complement system. 


Types of immunity:

Protection
produced by the person's own immune system which is usually permanent 
Protection
transferred from another person or animal as antibody and is temporary
protection that wanes with time 

Principles of vaccination:
Self
verses no self 
Protection
from infectious disease
Usually
indicated by the presence of antibody 
Very
specific to a single antigen immunity


Advantage of vaccination:

Active
immunity produced by vaccine
Immunity
and immunologic memory similar to natural infection but without risk of disease


Classification of Vaccines


Classification Types,Live  attenuated,Inactivated,Protein-based,Polysaccharide-based
1.0,Viral,Virus,Subunit,Pure
2.0,Bacterial,Bacterial,Toxoid,Conjugate



Characteristic features of Live
Attenuated Vaccines

Attenuated (weakened) form of the
     "wild" virus or bacteria 
Must replicate to be effective 
Immune response similar to natural
     infection 
Usually effective with one dose
     except those administered orally 
Severe reactions possible
Interference from circulating
     antibody
Unstable 


E.g. of Live Attenuated Vaccines
Viral measles,
mumps,rubella, varicella, yellow fever,
rubella, influenza, oral polio, BacterialBCG,
oral typhoid


Characteristic features of Inactivated Vaccines

Cannot
replicate 
Minimal
interference from circulating antibody 
Generally
not as effective as live vaccines 
Generally
require 3-5 doses 
Immune
response mostly hum oral 
Antibody
titre diminishes with time 
E.g. of Inactivated Vaccines
Viral
polio, hepatitis A, rabies (influenza)
Bacterial(pertussis) (typhoid)(cholera)
(plague)

Polysaccharide Vaccines
pneumococcal

meningococcal

Salmonella
Typhi (Vi) 
Haemophilus
influenza type b 
pneumococcal

Types of polysaccharide:

Pure
polysaccharide
Conjugate
polysaccharide

Pure
Polysaccharide Vaccines
Not
consistently immunogenic in children <2 years of age 
No booster
response 
Antibody
with less functional activity 
Immunogenicity
improved by conjugation 

Vaccination in Children:
BCG vaccine: Bacillus Calmette Guerin (BCG) is an attenuated
strain of Mycobacterium tuberculosis var. bovis, used as a live vaccine against
tuberculosis. The vaccine is given from birth to two weeks.
In order to maintain its potency, the
vaccine is supplied in freeze-dried 
at 4 degree C. BCG is administered
intradermally over the deltoid muscle. The dosage is 0.05 ml for newborns and
0.1ml for all other ages. The vaccine is given from birth to two weeks. BCG
does not protect from other mycobacterial disease such as leprosy. In neonate
and young infant, tuberculin testing is unnecessary before giving BCG.
Tetanus Toxoid(Adsorbed): It is used to immunise children from
age of 3 months onwards. Risk of tetanus neonatorum in infant is avoided by
immunising pregnant woman. 
For active primary immunisation : 2doses
at an interval of 4to 6 weeks.
Reinforcing dose should be given 9 to 12
months later to increase the 
level of immunity.
Booster dose should be given every 5
years to maintain adequate level 
of immunity even if they do not suffer
from any injury.
Hepatitis B vaccine:
Hepatitis B is an infection of the liver thats caused by a virus and can result
in liver damage or failure. Some babies can develop Hepatitis B if their
mothers are infected with it before or during pregnancy. 
Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (DTP) vaccine:
This vaccine protects against three
diseasesdiphtheria, tetanus, and 
pertussis or whooping cough:
Diphtheria
is a serious infectious disease caused by bacteria that produce toxins which
inflame the nervous system and heart and can result in heart failure and
paralysis.
Tetanus results
from bacteria that grow in wounds and that produce a toxin which affects the
nervous system and causes muscle spasms and paralysis, especially in the jaw
area. Its also called lockjaw. 
Pertussis
or whooping cough, another infectious disease caused by bacteria, is especially
dangerous for babies under the age of 1. Its most well-known symptom is a
debilitating racking cough.
The vaccine should be given in five doses at 2 months, 4 months, 6 months,
around 18 months, and before the child enters school, between 4 and 6 years of
age. A sixth dose of diphtheria and tetanus vaccine is recommended between 11
and 16 years of age.
Baby may have a mild reaction to this vaccine including a slight fever (under
102 degrees F), fussiness, and redness in the thigh area where the shot is
given. These symptoms typically last up to 2 days and doctor may suggest giving
the child some baby acetaminophen to ease the fever.
Haemophilic influenza type B (HIB) vaccine:
Haemophilus influenzae type b isnt the viral infection that everybody
calls the flu. Instead, its a fast-moving bacterial infection that can cause
baby to have ear and bronchial infections. HIB also can lead to meningitis in
children under the age of 2, so it is important that protect the child with the
HIB vaccine.
Before the age of six months: At 6, 10, 14 weeks
followed by a booster 
12 months after last injection. 
Children not vaccinated before 6 months of age: 2
dose and booster 12 
months after 2nd dose.
Children not vaccinated before 1year of age: 1dose.
Poliomyelitis vaccine (oral) i.e. OPV:
Polio, short for poliomyelitis, is a serious viral disease that starts with a
fever and can lead to paralysis, muscle atrophy, and permanent disability. In
its most severe forms, polio can cause death. Oral polio vaccine developed by
sabin and is given by mouth at birth to 2 months, 2,4, 6, 6-9 months, 18
months, 4-6years, 6years. 
Heptavalent Conjugate Pneumococcal (PCV) vaccine:
This vaccine protects your child against the pneumococcal bacteria which can
cause meningitis, pneumonia, and serious infections in a child's brain, blood
stream, and ears. 
First
vaccination: A single injection confirms
protection against 
pnuemococcal
types contained in the vaccine.
Revaccination
should not be carried before 5 years, unless the subject 
is
particularly exposed.
Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR) vaccine:
This vaccine provides coverage for three diseases in a single shotmeasles,
mumps, and rubella or German measles:
Measles is a viral infection that
causes distinctive red spots and is characterized by cold-like symptoms and a
high fever. 
Mumps is an infectious viral disease
that results in swelling of the parotid gland thats just in front of the ear
and the salivary glands. The swelling can occur on the sides of one or both
cheeks. Mumps usually is accompanied by a fever and pain when the patient opens
his mouth or eats.
Rubella or German measles is similar to
measles in that its a viral infection that results in a fever, swollen glands,
and a rash.
The first MMR vaccine is usually recommended between 12 and 15 month of age and
seldom has any serious side effects. Baby, however, may be more sleepy than
usual and have a mild rash, slight fever, or slight swelling in the neck or
diaper area. The second shot (booster) is recommended between 4 to 6 years of
age.
Varicella (Var) vaccine: 
vaccine protects against chicken pox, a viral infection which is highly
contagious and results in a blister like rash thats very itchy. Varicella
vaccine is indicated for active immunisation against varicella in healthy
subjects from the age of 12 months onward.
12
months-12 years:
1dose
13 years and above: 2dose with an
interval of 6-10 weeks.
Influenza vaccine:
The influenza vaccine is more commonly known as the flu shot. The flu is more serious
than the common cold and can be very dangerous in young children, especially
those with certain medical conditions. For this children 6 months of age or
older with certain risk factors receive the influenza vaccine yearly. It can
also be given to other children. If you aren't sure if your child should
receive this vaccine, ask your child's doctor. 
Children
6months to 3years of age: 1injection of 0.25ml
Children
3years and all ages: 1injection of 0.5ml.
Children
under 8 years of age who have not been infected or 
Vaccinated
previously should be given a 2nd dose after an interval of
at
least 4 weeks.
Measles Vaccine: It is a lyophilized preparation
of the highly attenuated Schwarz strain of measles virus, obtained by
propagation of the virus, obtained by propagation of virus in chick embryo
tissue cultures. The optimal age for active vaccination is 15 months. The
vaccine pellet should be completely dissolved in the diluent. The entire
contents of a reconstituted monodose vial or 0.5 ml of reconstituted vaccine
from a multi dose vial should be injected subcutaneously.
Hepatitis A vaccine: It is a sterile suspension
containing formaldehyde-inactivated hepatitis A virus adsorbed onto aluminium
hydroxide. First dose should be given at elected date and second one month
later. Booster dose is recommended at any time between 6and 12 months after
initiation of primary course. Vaccine should be used intramuscularly and the
dose is 0.5ml/not less than 360 ELISA units. 
 





Vaccination In  Children→,Hepatitis B,BC G,Oral Polio,DTP,Haemophilic influenza type B (HIB),Measles (M-Vac),"Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR)",Typhoid,Varicella,Hepatitis A,Tetanus (TT-SP)
Age ↓,Hepatitis B,BC G,Oral Polio,DTP,Haemophilic influenza type B (HIB),Measles (M-Vac),"Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR)",Typhoid,Varicella,Hepatitis A,Tetanus (TT-SP)
Birth-2Weeks,1st Dose,1 dose,1st Dose,,,1 Dose,,,,,
6 Weeks,2nd Dose,,2nd Dose,1st Dose,1st Dose,,,,,,
10 Weeks,,,3rd Dose,2nd Dose,2nd Dose,,,,,,
14 Weeks,3rd Dose,,4th Dose,3rd Dose,3rd Dose,,,,,,
9 Month,,,,,,,1 Dose,,,,
12-15 Month,,,,,,,,,1st Dose,1st Dose,
18 Months,,,5th Dose,Booster Dose1st,Booster Dose,,,,,,
2 Years,,,,,,,,1st Dose,,2nd Dose,
5 Years,,,6th Dose,2nd Booster  Dose,,,,Booster Dose 1st,,,
8Years,,,,,,,,Booster Dose 2nd,,,
10 Years,,,,,,,,,,1st Booster  Dose,1st dose
15-16 Years,,,,,,,Rubella Vaccine,,,,2nd Booster  Dose

 





































 

Vaccination,Indication,Dosage
Tetanus Toxoid (Adsorbed),In Pregnant mothers: Immunisation should be done by  injecting 2 dose of TT starting in 7th month with an interval of 4  weeks. In General: In case of all persons actively  immunized booster dose should be given every 5 years to maintain adequate  level of immunity even if they do not suffer from any injury.,0.5 ml by intramuscular route.
Cholera,It is recommended only in times of outbreaks  of cholera.,"In adult: 0.5 ml after 4 to 6 weeks.  In case of emergency, a single dose of 1ml may be given."
Meningococcal  Vaccine,Prophylaxis against cerebrospinal  meningitis due to meningococcal of A and C groups.,0.5 ml subcutaneous or intramuscular
Hepatitis A vaccine,Active immunisation against hepatitis  A virus infection.,Adults: 1ml/not less than 720 ELISA  units.
Antisnake  Venom Serum,Indicated in snake bite.,
Rabies  Vaccine,For immunisation against rabies after exposure  and for prophylactic vaccination against rabies before exposure.,"Vaccine should be given by  intramuscular route. Dosage: Pre-exposure:  3 doses injections on day 0, day 7, day28. A booster dose after 1 year and  1dose after every 5 years. Post-exposure:  After exposure start immediately a full course of treatment for both adults  and children consists of 5 injections on day of exposure(0 day), 3, 7, 14,  30. A booster dose on day 90 is optional."


 



