

Lokapurusha Saamya





Lokapurusha Saamya

AyuSoft Team

Introduction:

Loka means universe. Purusha-is any living being. And Saamya means similarity. Accordingly, an
individual is an epitome of the universe. All the material, functional and spiritual
phenomena of the universe are also present in an individual. And all those
present in the individual are also contained in the universe.


Related Sootra 

 
||
S.Su.1/30


S.Sha.1/7


* C.Sha.5/4



S.Su.21/8

Description

Innumerable, distinct in structure and functions are the
parts of the universe and also the parts of an individual. For example the
specific entities of the universe, such as trees, grass, animals etc. and of an
individual such as tendon, artery, ligament etc, are innumerable in number.
They are identical in the individual with those of universe. Even though
modified in appearance, they have similarity of origin. Prithvi constitutes the shape, Jala-moisture,
responsible for interlinking, Tejas-heat
or converting capacity- Agni, Vaayu- impulse initiation, Aakaas`ha all the porous hollow parts;
and Brahma is the internal knower soul. 

Even other entities like day, divided as morning, noon and
evening are compared to universal entities. In the morning the intensity of the
sunlight is less and there is more moisture, so it is labeled as Kapha Kaala. In the noon the intensity
of the light and temperature is more so it is called as the Pitta Kaala. And the evening is dominant
by moving winds, which is called as Vaata
Kaala. 

The function carried out by the wind in the universe is
identical and comparable to the Vaata.
The function done by the heat of the sun is identical and comparable to the Agni or Pitta and function done by water in the universe is comparable to Kapha.

These three entities of the body, which are changing every
now and then, are compared and interpreted as Tridosha_s functioning in the individual.


The main comparisons are tabulated below:

Universal,Individual
1. Here  potential of the Brahma symbolized  by Daksha Prajaapati,Here  potentiality of the internal soul; symbolized by the mind
2. Indra,2. Ahamkaara
3. Aaditya,3.  Digestion
4. Rudra,4.  Anger
5. Soma,5.  Build of components [pleasure]
6. Vasus,6.  Happiness
7. Ashvinee_s,7.  Complexion
8. Marut,8.  Enthusiasm
9. Vis`hvedeva,9. All  the senses
10. Tamas,10.  Ignorance
11. Jyoti [light],11.  Knowledge
12. Krita Yuga,12.  Childhood
13. Tretaa Yuga,13.  Youth
14. Dvaapaara Yuga,14.  Middle Yuga or age
15. Kalee Yuga,15. Old  Yuga or age
16.  Deluge [Pralaya],16.  Death



In here
many aspects of universal and individual entities are put according to eastern
style to understand the entire canvas of Lokapurusha
similarity. [Saamya].


Application:

A student can build his perspective about in-vivo and
in-vitro entities by getting progressively evolved. This Siddhaanta is useful to understand the Tridosha_s and the Tridosha
Siddhaanta. Entities from Loka are
responsible for the distinct appearance of an individual. This leads to an
understanding of cause and effect, ultimately. It states relation in
environment and the individual, and passes a message that protection of
environment can protect you. 


