

Navadravya Siddhaanta





Navadravya Siddhaanta

AyuSoft Team

Introduction

To come
into existence western sciences state raw material is required. Oriental
sciences however, make a more comprehensive approach that considers
non-material components too, along with material ones. Since the number of such
essentially required is nine, the term Navadravya
meaning the obligatory nine came into existence. It will be scientifically safe
to continue the term Dravya here as
any attempt to equate it to 1. Element 2. Substances 3. Matter 4. Molecule etc
is not suitable to the technical meaning that each term possesses. (In the
prevalently understood meaning.) The nine Dravya_s
are essential contributors together for each and every living or the nonliving
cognizable thing. Without the contribution of all the nine, nothing can be
cognized. They are by their technical names; Aakaas`ha, Vaayu, Tejas, Jala, Prithvi, Kaala, Dik, Aatman, and Manas. These are the causes together Kaaran`a, devoid of contribution from
them all evolvement is impossible.


Related Sootra


C.Su.1/48

For the existence of living and non-living, the
requirement is provided by contribution from the pool of five mega entities,
the knower, the initiation/intention to produce by the mind of someone Manas, a specific stipulated period Kaala and the distinct location Dik.


Description:

The prevalent contention that to produce anything, only
raw material is required is not sufficiently comprehensive. Thus software has
come in to existence, is a fact; the apparent diskette or CD is made up of
plastic. But in the past the technical efforts by capable technocrats were
still done; it was intellectually conceived in the mind of a living being. He
with his intention to produce a device by the information technology technique,
could go ahead. Had this contribution of a living designers intention to
evolve, been absent, the mere pre-existence of a diskette was not at any stage
likely to be the software by itself. The idea and raw materials availability
alone, cannot, by themselves, result in the device. A suitable location and
stipulated periods contribution is absolutely obligatory. Understanding by the
oriental method, covers all the components that are genuinely required for the
existence of everything. Here the contribution by the five mega entities; in
the way of availment of room, action of mobilizing forces
for touch, apparent complexion by heat contact, interlinking of particles
by/for earlier fluid character, and shape/form by decrease in fluid dominance
in that order, is understood. That respectively happens by contribution from Aakaas`ha, Vaayu, Tejas, Jala, Prithvi, the five-mega entities. The statement that nine contribute
for evolvement of everything is factual for all. 


Individual Causative Entities:

Aakaas`ha:

Aakaas`ha provides room for all to appear,
to modify or ultimately to terminate. Because of the relative rare arrangement
of Aakaas`ha in between all
substances, each one can be distinctly seen / cognized. If this rare
arrangement is not there, nothing could have been differentiated distinct from
one another. No resistance to enter in or exit out is the specific character of
global Aakaas`ha. You may prepare
certain walls as boundaries and label that one as the Aakaas`ha of the pot etc. It hides/ covers nothing, and therefore
is of Satva dominance. 

Restricted to ear, the total architecture of components
show that hollowness and thinness is given a freehand in the ear. The middle
ear is connected to global Aakaas`ha
by the Eustachian tube. Whenever rareness is added to any dense arrangement, a
specific sound is produced. Restricted to the body, all hollow structures in
the body, which provide the entry, process or exit of many substances; are
dominated by Aakaas`ha. The lungs,
GIT, skull, heart and circulatory tubular complex, all are the main examples.
One can extend this, up to the most minute lumen in the cell. 


Vaayu:

The global Vaayu is
spread all over and can be known by movement and touch of other things. Vaayu itself is not visible. But trees,
clouds etc moved by Vaayu make its
existence known.The touch of Vaayu is
vibrant; Vaayu is responsible for the
intake and exit of substances from the body. Vaayu dominant components of the body are the impulse producers.
The hollowness of Aakaas`ha facilitates
the impulsive functions of Vaayu.
Impulse alone, with no availability of looseness/hollowness, cannot be
effective for actual propagations/changes in positions. The skin is relatively
dry, spread all over entity. By movement in object of touch, or the skin, the
sensation of touch is understood.


Tejas: 
The global Tejas is
uninterruptedly functioning by producing heat and causing conversion all the
while. The touch of Tejas is hot. It
is dominant by its shining colors. Both the eyes have the specific shining
material that is the microform of universal Tejas.
The bodily Tejas is seen in digestive
capacity, seen at skin, and the food tract


Jala:

Globally Jala appears
in a variety. Thus snow, mist, dew and rainwater are responsible for many inter linking. It has a cool touch.
The Jala dominant organ in the body
is the tongue. The tongue is a special sense organ encircled by secreting glands.
All the watery substances in the body are accompanied by the fluid quality of Jala. Without it they cannot circulate.
The water around tongue is responsible for taste. The body harbors a variety of
fluids in channels, cells, reservoirs etc. the serum, fat, urine, sweat,
internal digestive secretions, saliva, are some of the forms of bodily Jala. 


Prithvi:

Prithvi is the entity, full of variety of
shapes and hardness patterns. It has a variety of touches and smell. The nose
is a relatively stout sense organ located in bony surrounding and having thick
secretions compared to all other sense organs. The hard lasting, rigid, shaped
components like bones, cartilages, hair, teeth, stools; nails etc are dominated
by Prithvi in the body. 


Kaala:

The natural scheduled, withering away of each and
everything, even though provided with nutritive raw material; has motivated the
scientists to consider Kaala as the
essential contributor. The sun repeats the rhythm of appearance and
disappearance very regularly. The rising and setting of the sun everyday gives
the cause of existence and maintenance of all living beings. Kaala is an absolute entity even though
labels like Monday, March, summer, Chaitra,
Ramjaana Uttaraayan`a etc. are given
to it, as per convention. By itself it does not expect anything else for its
proclamation. 

The concept of Kaala,
as an entity has been accepted because, even with the availability of raw
material, and working force; the evolvement actually takes place only after contribution
of an essential stipulated period. For the evolvement of so many natural crops
the contribution by time is specific and distinct. Even a continued supply of
nourishing components, does not assure growth, if the stipulated period is
over. For existence or extinction the contribution of time is obligatory, and
cannot be disposed off. This entity is nameable; though non-dimensional. Oriental scientists have
considered even the non-dimensional contributors, in the comprehensive method
of all causative factors, in evolvements. The rhythmic special movement of the
sun is responsible for building or depleting of tissues ultimately. Thus Kaala causes generation, regeneration
and degeneration by adding, avoiding, separating many factors from each other.

Dik:
The knowledge of anything cannot be sufficient unless its
location, in relation to some known point, is described. The entity Dik is direction. The Dik is always essentially told /
declared, in relation to one, which is known or established earlier. The
description of something needs details about, the things location in relation
to a persons location. When the user of this device, looks towards the screen,
he can cognize the letters. If this action/instruction to locate ones vision on
screen is not there the advantage of existing letters cannot be there.
Everythings description is complete, only when information of, above, below, on
the right, on the left, to the back or on the front, is added. Devoid of it
actual localization is not possible.

Dis`haa is more popular than the word Dik alone. It is essentially relative to
some one else and is never absolute. East, West, North, South, are relative
expressions. Nowhere is there absolute character by examination of which the
nomenclature of north-east etc. can be noted. The other attributes of Dis`haa are similar to that of Kaala. 

Aatman:

The body from childhood to old age undergoes many changes.
The expression of pain or pleasure remains the same and it is the only property
of knower inside Aatman meaning that
one who is continuously on the move. The body is composed of a combination of
distinct architecture of different organs etc. and an awareness system
independent of material components. By deploying the sense organs the knower
inside and outside the body, the Aatman,
protects the body, by modifying the choices of environmental entities. The two
types of Aatman are Jeevaatmaa limited to a being under
observation and Paramaatmaa present
in all beings. The number of beings and their characteristics are same. The
Knowers association with body can be
noted by examination of certain signs on the body when illness approaches, it
modifies, the desires or disgusts, and there are efforts to bring into action
the transient modifications till the illness prevails. It is common to all. The
Paramaatmaa is only one, common and
similar to all animals.


Manas: 

Manas are the non-material component of
the body like Aatman. The location of
Manas is in the heart and head i.e. the central area between two
eyebrows. Thus Manas`s activities or
modifications can be known by examination of heart. The tools of Manas are the five sense organs. When Manas works without using the tools of
sense organs, in that case it reviews the past, compares the present and
estimates the future situation. By using its specific capacity to objectify,
even without actual material and only by intellect it enjoys drama, poetry etc.
the working of Manas is to decide
what is beneficial to be followed and what is detrimental for that juncture, to
be avoided, after a comprehensive consideration of all. Here Manas need no objects to be perceived by
the sense organs. From contact Manas becomes
happy or sorrowful. It is the main function of Manas. Since it is responsible for the feeling of pain and pleasure,
and their outward expression, the essential components of Manas are Satva, rajas and Tamas. They are very subtle and one dominates in the total body,
are the result from it makes the character of a person. 

From the elaborations and examples given above, one can
understand that contribution from all nine is obligatory for the existence /
awareness of everything.


Application: 

To really plan for making anything, one should not only
take into account the raw materials, but he should have all 9`s availability
before his mind. The innumerable cognized entities are from the contribution of
the causative nine; the original contributing global entities are not fully
comprehended by the capacities of the sense organs. The contributed, however,
is cognizable. 


From Kaaran`a_s non-decipherable
due to mega or extremely microforms, the materials around, record able is available for utilization in management of health and disease.
The effect contributed from causes, is manageable for a number of purposes; but
the causes in total are never manageable by human efforts. Kaarya is manageable but never the Kaaran`a_s.



