

Aamadosha Chikitsaa





Aamadosha Chikitsaa
Reference: 
C.Vi.2,
A.H.Su.13

Introduction: 
Aama is an undigested
food. Due to lack of Agnibala (Weak
digestive power), the partially undigested food, which remains in Aantra, vitiated due to Dosha is called as Aama. It is the root cause for the development of majority of
intrinsic diseases.

Saamaanya Chikitsaa:
Apatarpan`a is advisable as primary treatment.
Apatarpan`a is not advisable always. Following
regime should be administered.
Paachana, Deepana, Snehana and
Svedana followed by the appropriate type of S`hodhana should be administered. For Deepana Paachana Sneha Dravya having Paachana property predominantly and Deepana property partially. 
Paachana results in digestion of Aama. Due to Deepana Aaama gets separated from the Dhaatu. Snehana results in Utkleshana.
Svedana administered after this leads the movement of Aama towards the Kosht`ha.
This Aama should now be eliminated out of the
body through the nearest possible path by administering appropriate S`hodhana.
S`hodhana 
For Aamaas`hayatha Aama -Through oral root
For Urdhvajatrugata Aama - Through nasal
root.
For Pakvaashayastha Aama - Through anal
root.

Aavasthika Chikitsaa: 



Special Precautions (Chikitsaa
Nishedha): 
S`hodhana Chikitsaa should be avoided in following
conditions.
S`hodhana
Chikitsaa should be
avoided in Saamadosha which are scattered
all over the body (Leena) or clung to
Dhaatu or which are not mobile (Anutklishat`a).
Saamadosha which have spontaneously become mobile
either upward or downwards should not be treated with S`hamana Chikitsaa. (Saama
Dosha which have become spontaneously mobile and being eliminated from
oral or anus should not be arrested
in the initial stage)


Properties of usual diet:
Normally diet should be
digested properly and there should not be any symptom like Hridaya Uparodha, Kukshee
Peed`ana, Paars`hva Vipaat`ana, Udara Gaurava, or Indriya Apreen`ana. If diet is taken in a small amount, which does
not fulfill hunger, then it is called Heenamaatraas`hana.


Search Anveshaka:
Search Kalpa, Dravya, Aahaara, Vihaara, Chikitsaa Karma 
Vyaadhi = Aamadosha
Karma = Paachana, Deepana





