

Chhardi Chikitsaa





Chhardi Chikitsaa

References: 
Ch.Chi.20,
Su.U.49, A.H.Chi.6

Pathogenesis of Chhardi
Increased Dosha are expelled out in upward
direction through mouth it is called as Chhardi
(Vomiting or Sickness). It is an acute condition and if neglected can lead to
acute dehydration and further complications.

Types of Chhardi
Chhardi is of five types.
Vaataja
Pittaja
Kaphaja
Tridoshaja
Dvisht`aarthajaa (Bheebhtsajaa)
Dauhridajaa  due to insult of likings of pregnant woman
Aamajaa  in diseases like Visoochikaa
Saatmyaprakopajaa (Saatmya
Tyaagaat)  suddenly giving up the Saatmya.
Krimijaa  due to worms 

Saamanya
Chikitsaa
All types of Chaardi have the same cause, the
irritation of Aamaas`haya. As it Aas`haya of Aama, its irritation is treated by treating Aama. Langhana (Fasting
with light food or without food) is the best remedy for treating Aama. Also regime like Saatmya Annapaana, S`huska Phala Sevana, and
Application of aromatic powders, follow by bath should be given. In addition,
mouth should be washed with cold water.


Aavasthika
Chikitsaa
















S`hodhanaarha Rugn`a:
If
the person suffering from Chhardi is Balavaan (having capacity / strength to
tolerate
effects
of disease as well as treatment), should be treated by Kapha - Pittaghna S`hodhana i.e. Vamana and Virechana. Vaata gets aggravated by Vamana or Virechana hence in Vaataja
Chhardi both the procedures should be
avoided.

S`hamanaarha
Rugn`a:
Durbala (weak) patient should be treated by S`hamana and Langhana.
Drugs
and diet should have following properties:
Manodnya (liked / favorite)
Laghu (easy to digest) 
Saatmya (wholesome / habitual) 
Vis`hushka (Dry)

Sugandhi
(flavored / aromatic)

After
having food sprinkling of cold water on face is also suggested. These all
things are advised for pacification of Dosha
and Chhardi increasing the strength. Laajaa is the best S`hamana Dravya for Chhardi.

Vaataja Chhardi:
Contraindicated treatment:

S`hodhana is contraindicated in Vaataja Chhardi, if
administered likely complications are chest pain or Hridaya Drava etc. Hence, only S`hamana
is the choice to treat. Ghrita is
the drug of choice in this condition. It is used with Saindhava (rock salt) or medicated Ghrita are used.

Indicated treatment:

Sneha Virechana (Virechana by unctuous medicines or medicines
along with ghee or oils like Eran`d`a
Taila) is also advised by Sus`hruta Samhitaa. Ghrita added with Kat`u and
Lavan`a Dravya is indicated for
drink so as to pacify Vaata Dosha.

Kashaaya indicated in
Vaataja Jvara should be used to treat
Vaataja Chhardi.

Pittaja Chhardi:
Pittaja Chhardi
should be treated by Virechana as it
is best S`hodhana therapy of Pitta. Pratimaarga (in opposite direction) S`hodhana helps in Vaataanulomana
and ultimately pacification of Chhardi.
Mridu Virechaka Dravya like Draakshaa, Ikshurasa, Tilvaka Ghrita should be
used.

If Pitta is more aggravated in Kapha Sthaana, it should be alleviated by Vamana because it is the nearest way of letting Dosha out from Kaphaas`haya. For this Madhura (sweet) and Tikta (Bitter) medicines are used.




Kaphaja
Chhardi:
For Kaphaja Chhardi, Vamana is the
treatment of choice as it is the best S`hodhana
therapy for Kapha Dosha. If the person suffering from Chhardi is weak, he is treated by S`hamana Kalpa, which is supported by Kaphaghna and Hridya Aahaara.

Tridoshaja
Chhardi:
Tridoshaja Chhardi is
treated by combinations of the medicines used in Vaataja, Pittaja and Kaphaja Chhardi respectively after carefully assessing the Dosha
dominance, season in which the disease has occurred, Rogabala (intensity / state of
disease - Saadhya / Asaadhya) and Agnibala etc.

As
other Saannipaatika diseases Chhardi too exhibits bizarre signs and
symptoms hence the physician has to be innovative it its management. All
possible permutations and combinations of medicines, procedures etc. have to be
employed depending upon the apparent Dosha
dominance along with due consideration to the season of onset, physical power
of the person and his digestive capacity as well as the strength of the
diseases with its prognosis.

Dvisht`aarthajaa Chhardi:
This
type of Chhardi is also called as Manobhighaataja Chhardi. The first step of treatment is to avoid
/ refrain from the causative factors. This is supported by indulgence in
favourite food, fragrance of flowers, soil (wet soil), sour fruits etc. Aas`hvaasana and Harshan`a (counseling) are also equally important to divert the
persons attention from the cause. 

Sus`hruta Samhitaa advocates treatment for specific type:
Aamaja Chhardi 
Langhana, Vamana
Asaatmyaja Chhardi
Saatmya Aahaara, Vihaara
Bibhatsaja
Chhardi  Hridya
Aahaara, Vihaara
Dauhrid Avamaanaja Chhardi  completing the demand
Krimija Chhardi  Treat as per Krimija Hridroga

Saatmya:
Charaka Samhitaa specifies
it as the route of causative factor is the best way of using medicine for the
disease e. g. if Chhardi is caused by
Asaatmya Gandha it should be treated by Saatmya
Gandha. 

Saatmya is homologous stimulus response; some substances
are homologous from birth due to the Prakriti
while others become homologous by repeated consumption / habit forming. Sudden
deviation from usual, homologous behaviour is a cause for diseases like Chhardi. Hence the principle of
management is to restore the homologation that is disturbed and allay the
condition. The various ways it could be done are described above.




Prasakta Chhardi (chronic / persistent
vomiting):
Excessive
Chhardi causes Dhaatukshaya (dehydration, loss of fluid content first and finally
the unctuous content too, resulting in depletion of the volume of Dhaatu), resulting in Vaata Prakopa which creates further complications. Stambhana and Brimhan`a treatment advised in Vamana Karma Atiyoga should be
given in this condition. 

Sarpigud`a, Maamsarasa, Ghrita
(Medicated as Kalyaan`aka, Tryooshan`a, Jeevaneeya) as well as Pathya
Leha are also used to treat Prasakta Chhardi 

Pathya: 
Gun`a / Karma - Laghu, S`hushka,
Saatmya
Dhaanya - Bharjita Yava, Jeern`a
Shasht`ika S`haalee, Godhuma, Bharjita Godhuma, Tand`ula 
S`himbee - Sateena, Maasha,
Bharjita Mudga, Chan`aka
Maamsa - S`has`ha, Mayoora, Tittira, Laavaa, Jaangala Maamsa, S`hushka
Maamsa 
Phala - Naarikela, Nimbuka,
Aamalakee, Badara, Draakshaa, Kapittha, Haritakee, Daad`ima, Maatulunga,
Aamara, Mridvikaa
Kritaanna - Laajaa Mand`a, Yoosha,
Raaga, Khaand`ava, Paanaka, Avaleha, Khad`a
Other - Madhu (Pushpottha), Gomootra, Kambalika, Madya,
Suraa, Jaatiphala, Us`heera, Nimba, Vaasaa, S`harkaraa, Mis`hreyaa,
Naagakes`hara, Vetrragra, Dhaanyaka, Virechana, Vamana, Langhana, Hridya
Padaartha, Kasturee, Chandana, Priya Peya

Apathya:
Gun`a/
Karma - Snigdha, Ushn`a, Vidaahee, Drava
S`haaka - Alaaboo, Bimbee,
Kaaravellaka, Chitraka, Meda, Sarshapa
Other - Atidrava,
Asaatmya Anna, Dusht`a Anna, Elaa, Sarshapa, Nasya, Basti, Svedana, Snehapaana,
Raktamokshan`a, Dantadhaavana

Search Anveshaka:
Search for Dravya, Kalpa, Aahaara, Chikitsaa Karma, Vihaara 
Vyaadhi Chhardi

Adhikaara 
Chhardi
Karma  Chhardinigrahn`a, Vamana, Virechana for
S`hodhana, Stambhana, Brimhan`eeya, Hridya. 
Effect on Dosha Kaphaghna, Pittaghna, Vaataanulomana
Effect on Mana Manahprasaadana





