

Ready to Print Rules - Panchkarma






Name of the patient:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Rookshan`a Date: from----------- to--------------- 
 Snehapaana Date: from-----------
to---------------
Vamana /  Virechana Date: ----------- Time:

Rules for Rookshan`a
/ Snehapaana / Vamana / Virechana:
Following
are the rules or information for the patient about Panchakarma specifically for Vamana
& Virechana. Patient should
read it carefully and follow these rules.
In case of any doubt, patient should contact the concerned Vaidya immediately.

Rookshan`a:

Avoid all oily
substances from the diet e.g. ghee, oil, butter, cheese, Paneer(cottage
cheese), milk, tea along with milk, wheat, rice, sugar, jaggery etc.
In the morning you
can have Jowar bread along with vegetable or leafy vegetable which is cooked
with pepper, red chilli powder and salt. Avoid oil in the vegetables
completely.

For dinner you
     can have green gram soup (Mudga
     Yoosha) prepared with little salt, red chilli powder (optional), to
     your hearts content.
Even you can have
     fresh butter milk devoid of butter.
Every time take
     hot water for drinking.
Take 2 teaspoons
     of honey and 1 cup of water 3-4 times a day.


Snehapaana:

Name of  Ghrita / Taila,Dose (in Gram / Bowl ),Anupaana,Remarks
,,,


You have to take the
ghee or oil in an increasingly amount everyday as prescribed by the Vaidya.(e.g.- ¼ bowl  1st day, ½ bowl- 2nd day, ¾ bowl  3rd day and 1 bowl  4th
day) or a measurement of spoons can also be taken.
Make sure that you
are empty stomach before you take the ghee/oil. It should be taken before 7
oclock in the morning. Immediately after taking the ghee / oil, take one cup
of hot water. If this results in giddiness, have the water after 1 hour from
the next day.
Take the medicines
(if any) to be taken in the morning along with the ghee / oil or have it after
1 hour.
Dont eat any solid
food unless & until you are properly hungry after consuming the ghee / oil.
In between if you are little hungry drink a glass of hot milk.
Everyday, keep a note
of the time you had your ghee / oil and the timing when you were hungry 
As you take more
& more quantity of ghee / oil, day by day, the time you feel hungry also postpones.
e.g. On the first day you might feel hungry after 6 hrs., on the 2nd
day after 8 hrs., on the 3rd day after 10 hrs. & on the 4th
after 12 hrs. If you feel hungry before these timings, inform your Vaidya.(This is an example and not
absolute)
The drinking water,
solid & liquid food, bathing water should be sufficiently hot.
You should avoid
exercise, roaming in cold whether or sun, sitting under the fan or cooler,
sitting in A.C. rooms, traveling, sleeping during day time, staying awake at
night, taking huge pillows while sleeping, talking too much, getting angry,
having intercourse, doing work which leads to physical & mental fatigue.
You should also avoid heavy meals which would lead to indigestion. Take ample
rest. Avoid coitus.
You may have loose or
semisolid motions when you are consuming ghee / oil. You may even find oiliness
at the anal orifice.

Svedana :(Steam bath)


When you are
     coming for steam at the time of Rookshan`a,
     you must drink a glass of hot water before you leave from home. 
When at the time
     of Snehapaana, you must add a
     pinch of salt, sugar or glucose to the water so you wont get exhausted.
While coming for
     the steam you should carry with yourself a set of fresh undergarments and
     a big towel.
While coming and
     going you should wear a sweater and also properly cover your head with a
     cap, muffler or scarf.
If you have any
     problem during or after steam bath such as intolerance to steam getting
     fatigued, feeling giddy having blackouts in front of eyes etc immediately inform
     the Vaidya
After you have
     taken the steam and dressed, wait for another 5-10 minutes in the clinic
     and after the body cools then and then only wear a sweater and walkout.


Follow up Chart:
You
should fill this form carefully during the Treatment.

Day,Date,Dose of  Sneha (in Gram / Bowl ),Snehapaana Time,Kshudhbodha Time,Remarks
1,,,,,
2,,,,,
3,,,,,
4,,,,,
5,,,,,
6,,,,,
7,,,,,


Vamana:

On the day before Vamana steam should be taken twice.
(Though ghee / oil is not consumed on that day.)
On the day before Vamana, you should (must) have Ud`eeda Vad`aa, Dadhee Vad`aa (Vad`aa
with curd), Kheera. Make sure that
nothing should be cold.
It is necessary that
your bowels are fully empty before the Vamana.
If you have a tendency to have constipation or hard stools, inform Vaidya. So that he can give you medicine
one day before.
Drink only hot water
before you come for Vamana. Dont
even take tea / coffee or milk.
As you have to take
mild steam before the Vamana, carry a
set of undergarments with you.
Wear warm clothing
while you leave for Vamana. Bring a
big & a small towel along with you.
A responsible person
should accompany you when you come for Vamana.
Cut the nails of your
right hand two days before the day of Vamana.
Tie your hair if it
is long.

Sansarjana
Krama:       

Day,Date,Time,Pradhaana  S`huddhi,Madhayama  S`huddhi,Avara S`huddhi
1,,Morning,-,-,-
1,,Evening,Peyaa,Peyaa,Peyaa
2,,Morning,Peyaa,Peyaa,Vilepee
2,,Evening,Peyaa,Vilepee,Kritaakrita Yoosha
3,,Morning,Vilepee,Vilepee,Kritaakrita Maamsa Rasa
3,,Evening,Vilepee,Akrita Yoosha,Saamanya Bhojana
4,,Morning,Vilepee,Krita Yoosha,-
4,,Evening,Akrita Yoosha,Akrita Maamsa Rasa,-
5,,Morning,Krita Yoosha,Krita Maamsa Rasa,-
5,,Evening,Krita Yoosha,Saamanya Bhojana,-
6,,Morning,Akrita Maamsa Rasa,-,-
6,,Evening,Krita Maamsa Rasa,-,-
7,,Morning,Krita Maamsa Rasa,-,-
7,,Evening,Saamanya Bhojana,-,-





