

Vipaaka




Vipaaka


Introduction:

To know the action of
Dravya in the body it is necessary to know the properties of that Dravya by
which it performs the actions in the body. Vipaaka
is one of the properties of Dravya.
The drug action seen on the body is a resultant effect of any of Rasa, Gun`a, Veerya, Vipaaka and
Prabhaava. Vipaaka is of three
types as Madhura, Amla and Kat`u. Though their actions are similar to the respective Rasa, they are different from the
respective Rasa as they become
functional after the processing of Agni
on Dravya.

Definition:



A.H.Su.9/20

This is
the definition of Vipaaka. After coming in contact with Jaatharaagni,
transformation occurs in the constitutional configuration of Mahaabhoota
of Rasas and the resultant constitutional change is called as Vipaaka.1

In the
process of digestion all the Rasas undergo three Avasthaapaakas
i.e. Madhura, Amla and Kat`u simultaneously and the resultant
change that dominates after the complete process is called as Vipaaka.
Vipaaka is of three types 1. Madhura, 2.Amla, 3.Kat`u 

Rasa And Vipaaka Relation:

Rasa,Vipaaka
Madhura Lavan`a,Madhura
Amla,Amla
Kat`u Tikta Kashaaya,Kat`u


This is
a general rule for Vipaaka since there are exceptions like Aamalakee
is Amla Dravya and still has Madhura Vipaaka; Kulattha has Kashaaya
Rasa and Amla Vipaaka etc.

Opinions
about Vipaaka:
1. Pancha
Bhautika Vipaaka-



Su.Su.46/526

Here Aahaara
is told as Panchadhaa Vipakva and hence Vipaaka is considered as
of five types namely Paancha Bhautika.2

2. Dvividha
Vipaaka-

The
three Vipaakas told earlier are further categorized into Laghu
and Guru based on Bhautika domination. Madhura Vipaaka
has Aapa and Prithvi Mahaabhoota dominating which are Guru
in nature hence it is Guru Vipaaka. Kat`u Vipaaka has domination of Agni
and Vaayu Mahaabhoota which are Laghu in nature hence it is Laghu
Vipaaka. Amla Vipaaka has domination of Prithvi and Agni
Mahaabhoota but its effects are similar to Laghu hence it is Laghu
Vipaaka.

Difference
between Rasa and Vipaaka:

Though
the resultant change is named after Madhura,Amla and Kat`u Rasas,
there is basic difference in them.Rasas are perceivable by Rasanendriya
but Vipaaka is not perceivable by sense organs directly.But the effects
it shows on the body are similar to those of Madhura, Amla, Kat`u Rasa.Therefore
it is called as Rasaihi tulyaphalah and not merely Rasaihi Tulya.3

Effects of Vipaaka on Body4:



 C.Su.26/61-62

Vipaaka,Effect On Dosha,Effect On Dhaatu,Effect On Mala
Madhura,Kaphakara,S`hukrala,Srushta  vin`mootra
Amla,Pittakrit,S`hukranaas`hana,Srushta  vin`mootra
Kat`u,Vaatala,S`hukrahaa,Baddha  vin`mootra



Here S`hukra
is representative of all the Dhaatu. S`hukrala indicates increase
in all the Dhaatu. S`hukranaas `hana indicates declining in quality of S` hukra and
incapability to increase its quantity. Similar is in the case of S`hukrhaa,
where quantity also affects.

Here
are some examples of Vipaaka:

Madhura
Vipaaka- Gokshura has
Madhura Rasa and Madhura Vipaaka and it increases urine, pacifies
vitiated Vaata Dosha and increase Dhaatu. Godhuma has Madhura
Rasa with Madhura Vipaaka and it increases Kapha and all the Dhaatu
as well as Mala.
Exception
- Yava i.e. Barley which is Madhura Rasa Dravya has Kat`u
Vipaaka and hence doesnt pacify Vaata but increases it.


Amla
Vipaaka- Chaangeree
is Amla Rasa Dravya having Amla Vipaaka hence increases Pitta
Dosha and Mala.
Exception-
Aamalakee has Amla Rasa as Pradhaana Rasa but its Vipaaka
is Madhura hence instead of increasing Pitta it pacifies
vitiated Pitta.

Kat`u
Vipaaka- Maricha
has Kat`u Rasa and Kat`u Vipaaka due to which it increases Pitta;
it also reduces Mala and Dhaatu.
Exception- Pork has Kat`u Rasa and
still it has Madhura Vipaaka hence it doesnt vitiates but pacifies it.5

References:
Ashtanga
Hrudaya by Vagbhatacharya, Pub. Krushnadas Academy, Varanasi, 5th
Edi. 2001., Vol.1, Pg. 135, Ch. 9, Sutra 20.

Sushrutasamhita
     by Sushrutacharya, Pub. Chaukhambha Sanskrit Series , Varanasi,1st Edi. 1998, Vol. 1, Ch. 46,
     Sutra 526. 

Ashtanga
Hrudaya by Vagbhatacharya, Pub. Krushnadas Academy, Varanasi, 5th
Edi. 2001., Vol. 1, Pg. 135, Ch. 9, Sutra 22.
Charakasamhita
by Charakacharya, Pub. Chaukhambha Sanskrit Series Office, Varanasi, 7th Edi.
2001, Vol. 1, Pg. 478, Ch. 26, Sutra 61-62.
Ashtanga
Hrudaya by Vagbhatacharya, Pub. Krushnadas Academy, Varanasi, 5th
Edi. 2001., Vol. 1, Pg. 135, Ch. 9, Sutra 26-27.


